It is the province of the Science of Language to explain, as far as
possible, the processes of the development of Language from its earliest
to its latest stage. The observations made on these processes would
naturally be registered in different historical grammars of different
definite languages; these grammars would follow the different steps in
the development of each single language from its earliest traditional
origin to its most recent phase. Wider and more general observations on
the processes of this development would naturally be expressed in a
comparative grammar, whose task would be to examine and compare the
relations between cognate families of speech, the common origin of which
is lost: but it would in this case be necessary to insist that the
comparisons instituted should only be between languages in the same
stage of development; or that the same stage of development, in each of
the languages selected for comparison, should be taken for the purpose.
It is the task of Descriptive Grammar to ascertain and record the
grammatical forms and the conditions generally of a given linguistic
community at a given time; to register, in fact, all the utterances of
any individual belonging to such community which might fall from him
without exposing him to the suspicion of being a foreigner. It will
naturally register its observations in abstractions, such as paradigms
and rules. Now, if we compare the abstractions made at any given period
of a language with those made at another time, we find that the results
are different, and we say that the language has changed in certain
respects: nay, we may even be able to detect a certain regularity in
these changes; as, for instance, if we note that in English every th
in the third person singular present indicative of a verb is now
replaced by s: but we gather by such comparisons no information as to
the true nature and origin of these changes. Cause and effect do not and
cannot exist between mere abstractions: they exist only between real
objects and facts. It is only when we begin to take account of the
psychical and bodily organisms on which language depends, and to seek
for relations of cause and effect in connection with these, that we are
on safe ground.
The true object of the Science of Language, as distinguished from
Descriptive and Comparative Grammar, is the entirety of the utterances
of all individuals that speak; and the relations of these utterances to
each other. A full history of the development of language would demand
an exact knowledge of all the groups of sound ever uttered or heard, and
of all the ideas awakened by such sound-groups and symbolised by them.
The impossibility of attaining to any such knowledge is obvious; it is,
however, possible for us to get a general idea of the play of the forces
at work in the vast and complex series of processes involved in the
development of language. A part only of these operating forces is
cognisable by our senses. Speaking and hearing are two of the processes
which can be apprehended; and, again, the ideas, or pictures, called up
by language, and those which, though unspoken, pass through our
consciousness, are to some extent capable of cognition. But one of the
greatest triumphs of modern psychology is the proof, due to its agency,
of the unconscious activity of the human mind. All that has once been
present to our consciousness remains as a working factor in
unconsciousness. Power consciously acquired by exercise in consciousness
may be translated into power operating and manifesting itself
unconsciously. The mind forms from the groups of ideas with which it is
stored, psychological groups, such as sound-groups, sequences of sounds,
sequences of ideas, and syntactical combinations. Strong and weak verbs,
derivatives from the same root, words fulfilling identical functions,
such as the different parts of speech, associate themselves into groups;
and again the plurals of nouns, their different cases, their different
inflections, and even entire clauses of similar construction or similar
cadence, group themselves in the same way. These groups arise naturally,
automatically, and unconsciously, and must not be confused with the
categories consciously drawn up by grammarians; though the two, of
course, must frequently coincide.
These groups must obviously be in a constant state of change, some
growing weaker from the fact that they are strengthened by no fresh
impulse, and some being strengthened and, it may be, changed by the
accession of new ideas which ally themselves therewith. It must not be
overlooked also that, as each person’s mind is differently constituted,
the groups of his linguistic ideas will take a development peculiar to
himself; even though the sources whence the groups take their rise
should be identical, yet the elements which go to form the groups will
be introduced differently and with different intensity in the case of
each individual.
The action of our physical organs, unaided, would be unable to bring
about the development of language. The word, when once spoken,
disappears and leaves no traces; psychological activity, and this alone,
connects the pictures of the past with the present. It must, therefore,
be the task of the historian of language to give as complete an account
as possible of the psychical organisms on which the production of
language depends; and the psychical organism of language in each
individual is the aggregate of more or less conscious recollections of
words, nay, even of entire phrases, and of their connections with
certain ideas, which is lodged in his mind. It is the business of the
historian of language to watch and examine these organisms as closely as
possible: to describe the elements of which they are composed, and their
connection with each other. A state or condition of a language at a
particular period could only be described by one possessed of a full
knowledge of the psychical conditions at a particular time of all the
members of any linguistic community. The more fully such observations as
those referred to above are carried out, and the greater the number of
individuals thus examined, the more nearly shall we be in a condition to
give an accurate description of a state of language. Without a rigidly
scrupulous examination such as we have described, it would be impossible
to say how much in the language of any individual is common to all or
most individuals speaking the same language, and how much is to be set
down to individual peculiarity. In every case it will be found that the
standard of the language governs to some extent the language of every
individual; but in the case of each individual there are likewise
elements which do not conform to the standard or normal language, and
which are, in fact, individual peculiarities.
In any case, the observation of a psychical organism of language is
difficult. It cannot, like the physical side of language, i.e. the
sounds actually produced and even the mode of their production, be
directly observed; for it lies unseen in the mind, and is only known by
its effects.
Of the physical phenomena of linguistic activity, the acoustic are those
which lend themselves most readily to our observation. We can make the
same individual repeat sounds practically identical as often as we
please; and we can note these with more or less accuracy in proportion
as our own sense of hearing is exact and developed. But as the
transitions between the different sounds are so infinitely small, it
follows that it must be a matter of extreme difficulty for the listener
to decide whether the sounds are indeed precisely the same in colour,
pitch, etc.; while, again, if it be desired to reproduce any sound, the
process has to be carried out by orally repeating it and striving to
reproduce it by an appeal to another’s sense of hearing.
We register the sounds of a language by mastering and registering the
movements of the organs of speech that produce them. Alphabetical
symbols are at best but very imperfect pictures of sound-groups: they
are used inconsistently in most cases: and in any case even the most
perfect phonetic alphabet cannot give a true and exact picture of the
countless sounds in speech--sounds which require to be constantly
denoted anew in every language. We can only succeed at all in
registering such sounds, when we are able to closely observe the sounds
uttered by living individuals. But when we cannot do this, we must
always think of the sounds which the writing is intended to represent;
and the power so to do demands some acquaintance with phonetics, and
with the relation between writing and language. Thus a certain special
training is necessary before we can hope to be able to gain any real
knowledge of even the physical manifestations of linguistic activity.
The psychical factors in linguistic activity lie, like everything else
psychical, unseen in the mind, and can therefore only be scrutinised by
means of examinations made upon our own minds. In the process of
watching other individuals we can never perceive any other than physical
results, and thus it happens that in order to acquaint ourselves with
the psychical organisms of language in others, we have to watch as
closely as possible the processes in our own minds, and then to classify
the phenomena which we observe in the case of others by the analogy of
what we observe in our own. As we both think and speak in the
mother-tongue, our classifications by analogy will be easier when we
have to deal with fellow-countrymen; so too, for obvious reasons, with
the living subject rather than with what has been committed to writing
in the past.
It will, then, be plain that the observation of any given state of
language is no easy matter, owing to the manifold and complex way in
which groups of ideas associate themselves in the human mind, and owing
to the incessant progress of hardly perceptible sound-change. It may
easily be gathered that even the most full and perfect of ordinary
grammars are quite unable to portray the manner in which different ideas
and groups of ideas range and classify themselves. Our grammatical
system can give but the most imperfect picture of the relationships
existing between different ideas. Certain categories, for instance, are
drawn up, and under one or other of these are ranged words under the
name of certain parts of speech. As a matter of fact, a large proportion
of words is capable of being used to fulfil the function of several
parts of speech, and in no language is this more obvious than in
English. Again, we are accustomed in grammar to meet--even in the case
of the Indo-European group of languages--with the same grammatical term
employed to express quite different functions, as when we speak of the
Latin future, and call the English future in “I shall” or “I will”
do by the same name. Again, we are accustomed, in the case of a language
which has passed from the synthetic to the analytic stage, to employ the
same categories, regardless of the fact that, in the analytical form of
the language, new shades of meaning have found expression as they have
also come into being. Again, we often define the meaning of words by
their etymology, even though the ordinary speaker may have no knowledge
whatever of that etymology, and a new and very different meaning may
have attached itself to the word.
The comparison of different epochs in the life of any language will
enable us to draw some inferences as to its condition in the past. Of
course, in proportion as the foreign factors that have made their
influence felt in the regular course of the language are fewer, the
simpler and more satisfactory will be the comparison. It would be
impossible to reconstruct the sounds of Anglo-Saxon, for instance, from
Middle English only; as it would be necessary to remember that Norman,
Danish, Celtic, and other influences had been busy with the language
between its earlier and later stages.
We now proceed to ask what are the causes of change in language? And
how do these causes operate? In the first place, they operate in most
instances without the consciousness of the individual. There are,
indeed, a few cases in which we may say that conscious intention on the
part of the individual is operative, as where a botanist coins a name
for some new variety, and forces it upon all the scientific men of his
circle. But it must be repeated that changes are for the most part
involuntary and unconscious. It is of the essence of the life of
language to unconsciously select the forms and sounds which may best
serve for conveying the meaning present in the speaker’s mind. The
material existing and forming the actual stock in trade of any language
may very aptly be looked upon as the survival of the fittest; in this
case, of the material fittest to survive. If we now proceed to
consider the causes of change in language, we must remember that there
is always in language a certain amount of freedom left to the
individual, which is quite independent of ordinary linguistic
development. As each speaker must have certain psychical peculiarities,
so must he express himself differently from every other speaker; and if
the sound-producing organs of any given speaker have any peculiarities,
he will exhibit corresponding peculiarities in the sounds which he
utters by their agency. Again, there are circumstances which must not be
overlooked, like the natural tendency to imitation; and the further
circumstance that all attempts at imitation must necessarily be
imperfect. Again, each individual is prone to modify the sounds which he
utters, through carelessness and economy of effort or laziness. Besides
all this, we must reckon the effects produced by such factors as
climate, which, however gradual in their operation, must still
ultimately leave some effects if only time enough is allowed. The
result of these displacements, if only the tendency to displacement
lasts long enough and operates in one direction, is a displacement of
usage. The new usage starts from the individual, and, under favourable
circumstances, succeeds in becoming permanent. There are, however,
numerous other tendencies to displacement likewise constantly occurring
which do not become permanent, because they are not consistent, and
because they do not all run in the same direction.
It must, then, be the task of the historian of language to endeavour to
settle the relationship between linguistic usage on the one hand, and
individual linguistic activity on the other; and in order to arrive at
any satisfactory conclusions on this point, it is necessary to classify,
as far as we can, the different changes of usage which occur in the
growth and development of language. It is, then, his business to trace
the relationship between the different classes which he has formed, and
to remember that his province is to trace connections where ordinary
grammar draws lines of demarcation, bearing in mind that the steps which
lead from class to class are very gradual, and that the processes
leading up to the smallest variation of usage are in very few cases due
to a single cause, but are generally very complicated. The gradual
development in the life of language in general may be best studied in
individual languages, as when we compare the English of Chaucer’s day
with that of our own; and, again, in the relations of individual
languages to each other, as when we compare Spanish, for instance, with
Italian, and note the different paths taken by these sister-tongues in
their development from Latin.
Sound-changes come about in the individual partly from the tendencies of
his own organs of speech, as when [ii] becomes [ai[2]] and when one
sound is habitually substituted for another, as in the case of the
Russian Feodor for Theodore, or the similar substitution, frequent
among children, fing for thing. They partly, too, depend upon the
influences which each individual receives from others, as when an
endeavour is made to substitute a significant for an unmeaning whole, in
cases of popular etymology and the like. To this must be added the
possibility of imperfect audition, and consequently of imperfect
reproduction of sounds. These influences are mostly operative and
easiest of observation at the time that language is being learnt, i.e.
most commonly during the time of infancy. To watch such processes as a
particular language is being learnt must always be very instructive for
the explanation of variations in the usages of language in general.
These changes in usage may of course be classified in various ways, but
there is one important point which should be noted: the processes may
either consist in the creation of what is new or in the disappearance of
what is old; or, lastly, in the replacement of the old by the new in a
single act, which is the process seen in sound-change. In the case of
word-significations, the processes of change consist either in the
disappearance of the old or in the appearance of the new. But these
processes are in truth very gradual. A word may be perfectly
intelligible with a certain meaning in one generation, and in another
generation may be obsolete and not understood: but there will none the
less have been an intervening generation, some members of which
understood the meaning attached to the word or phrase by the former
generation, while some only imperfectly understood it.
Again, we may classify changes in usage according to whether sounds or
significations are affected. The sounds change without the signification
being altered, as in the numerous words in Chaucer which as yet clearly
retained their French pronunciation. Again, the signification is
affected without any change affecting the sound, as in the case of
metaphorical uses of a word, such as a crane, used alike for the bird
and the lifting machine; etc. Thus it is that we arrive at the two
classes of change: sound-change and change in signification; not that
the two kinds are mutually exclusive--they may both occur together, as
in our owe, from A.S. âgan, to possess. But the two kinds of change
are independent in their origin and their development; neither is caused
by the other.
There is, however, an important class of cases in which Sound and
Meaning develop simultaneously; these are the original creations of
language; and we must suppose the entire development of language to rest
upon this primitive combination. We must conceive the original
utterances in language to have been the imitation of various natural
cries and sounds, aided and interpreted by gesticulation. Then comes a
stage in which the sound-groups already existing in language develop on
the basis of this original creation. They develop in this way mainly by
the influence of analogy, which is itself an imitative faculty and plays
a larger part where sound and signification are united than in the
department of pure sound. The principles of which we have spoken must be
held applicable to all languages at all stages of their development.
When once language had originated, it must have developed solely in the
way we have indicated. The differences between early and later stages of
language are merely differences of degree and not of kind.
It must also be noticed that we must not sharply separate the
grammatical and the logical relations of language, as if they were in no
way connected. Grammatical rules are simply convenient descriptions of
the most ordinary and striking ways in which a language expresses itself
at a particular time. But the groups of ideas in the mind of a speaker
are constantly forming themselves anew, and finding expression in forms
which do not tally with actual and received linguistic expression, and,
as they change, give rise to so-called irregularities of grammar. The
philologist must therefore discard neither the linguistic processes
which are described and registered by grammar, nor the psychical ones
which manifest themselves in speaking and hearing, but are not
represented in linguistic expression, and yet are always operative in
the direction of change in Language.
The most elementary study of Comparative Philology teaches us that from
a language which, in all essentials, may be considered one uniform
tongue, there have frequently sprung several others; and that these, in
their turn, have parted into new dialects or distinct languages. This
process has been usually compared to that which we see operative in the
growth and development of organic nature; and the relationship between
various languages has often been expressed by the terms applicable to
the human family. Latin, for instance, is called the parent of French,
Spanish, Portuguese, and the other Romance dialects; English and Dutch
are called sister-tongues, while the last-named pair may be called
cousins of German.
The comparison implied by such use of these terms is in the main
correct; but it would be more exact to illustrate the relationship
between languages from the language of Botany: we might consider the
language of each individual speaker as the parallel of the individual
plant, and compare the various dialects, languages, and families of
languages, to the varieties, species, and classes of the vegetable
kingdom. Even then our simile is but partially applicable, and a careful
consideration of how far it holds good, and where and when it becomes
misleading, will be found instructive to a student of language.
It is now an admitted truth in Zoology as well as in Botany that nothing
but the individual plant or animal has any real existence, and that all
our species or classes are merely convenient and useful, but always
arbitrary, abstractions. The difference between two primroses is not as
great as that between a primrose and, e.g., a daisy, it is true; but
the differences between these pairs are merely differences in degree,
and not in kind. When we classify or arrange in groups, we select some
characteristic and thereby give it a certain pre-eminence over others.
All individuals that possess this characteristic are accordingly ranged
upon one side, and all that do not possess it are ranged upon the other.
If the characteristic has been well chosen, our classification will be
rational, but will none the less remain arbitrary; and very often--nay,
nearly always--the choice of any other quality or characteristic as the
principle of classification will be found to involve a different
grouping.
It is the same with language. Strictly speaking, there exist as many
distinct languages as there are individual speakers. These millions of
languages, however, fall naturally into groups, whose component
individual parts differ but very little from one another, though no two
of them are exactly alike. Now, in order to decide whether the language
of any one individual belongs to some particular group, we must select
one or more particular characteristics, by which to test its claim; and,
our selection made, we shall often find ourselves excluding some
language whose inclusion would have resulted from any other test than
the one selected. The difficulty is much increased when we come to range
our groups into dialects, or to classify the latter among or around
languages (using that term again in its conventional sense); and, again,
to arrange languages into families.
At no single moment do we find all the individuals of any nation,
community, or group of human beings, speaking the same language in the
strict sense of the expression; and thus, if we say that a language has
broken up or separated into several dialects or into various new
languages, we give a very inadequate description of what has really
happened. It would be truer to state that amongst any given group of
individual languages, the difference, once slight, between its various
members has grown to such an extent that we can no longer conveniently
class these members together.
In the next place, our comparison will also hold good in the following
point. The nature and development of the individual animal depends upon
two things--descent and environment. Animals, the offspring of similar
parents, resemble one another in all essentials: they are, however, not
absolutely alike, and their individual peculiarities and development
depend largely on surroundings, such as climate, food, etc.,--influences
which, as might be expected, make themselves felt most strongly in
infancy.
Again, it is the same in language. Speech is acquired by imitation, and
those who speak to the child may be considered its linguistic parents.
The special bodily and mental idiosyncrasies of the child take the place
of the accidental surroundings to which reference has already been made.
No two children hear precisely the same words spoken by the very same
persons and exactly the same number of times; no two parents and no two
children are, in mind and body, exactly alike. From the beginning there
is a difference, small though it may be, between the linguistic
surroundings of any two individuals; and the development depends upon
personal peculiarities, which, from a linguistic point of view, may be
called accidental.
It appears, then, that our attention is engaged at the very outset of
our linguistic inquiry, not merely by the fact that differences arise in
the language of individuals, but more especially by the question why
these differences are not even greater and more rapid in their
development than they prove to be. We must seek an explanation not
merely of the nature of the forces tending to differentiate the
individual languages, but also of those which counteract such forces,
and whose influence is exerted towards uniformity and the conservation
of such unity as exists.
Yet if our comparison be sufficiently correct in two such important
points, we must not forget that in one point at least there is an
essential difference between the origin of species in the animal world
and the differentiation of languages.
We saw that with descent in the animal world we must compare
linguistic descent, which latter term implies that a child’s language
is acquired by imitation from the speakers surrounding him. The language
of the community in which the child grows up is the parent of his
speech. Now, it is evident that in the animal world the influence of
descent, powerful factor though it be, is still limited, inasmuch as the
direct effect of the parent’s influence ceases at a fixed point. In
language, on the other hand, the influence of the linguistic parent is
permanently at work: strongest during infancy, it diminishes in force
indeed, but never entirely ceases to make itself felt. Again, the animal
owes its birth to a single pair only, while in language an indefinite
number of speakers co-operate to produce the new individual. Moreover,
as soon as a child acquires any speech at all, it becomes in its turn a
member of the community and affects the language of others. Its speech
is consciously or unconsciously imitated by those from whom it learned
and is still learning; and thus, in language, parents may be said to
become the children of their own offspring.
Differentiation of language is, of course, impossible unless usage
alters; but it would be incorrect to conclude that differentiation must
necessarily be greater as the variation in usage is more violent. There
is no à priori reason why a large group of individuals, who at any
given moment speak what may be considered to be one and the same
language, should not alter their usage all in the same manner. Yet, if
we remember that each individual has his own peculiarities, and that,
while each acquires his speech by imitating others, such imitation is
never perfect, we shall readily understand that language must change
from generation to generation, even were other causes not present to
promote such changes; and, in fact, that differences will and must
arise. Alteration and differentiation are unavoidable; and it is
intercourse between the members of a community or a nation which can
alone keep these within bounds. The alterative forces are more free to
exert their influence in proportion as such intercourse is restricted.
If we could imagine a large country where the intercourse between the
inhabitants was of perfectly equal intensity throughout, we might expect
to find the language of each individual differing but imperceptibly from
the respective languages of his neighbours; and, though the tongues
spoken at opposite extremities might show a wide divergence, it would be
impossible to arrange the individual varieties into dialectical groups;
for the speech of each man would be some intermediate stage between the
individual tongues on either side. But such equal intensity of
intercourse exists nowhere over any considerable area. Geographical,
political, commercial influences, separately or combined, erect barriers
or overcome them; and peculiarities of speech which, arising at one
place, spread over others, are yet confined within certain limits. These
peculiarities, then, will clearly distinguish those dialects of
individuals which partake of them from such as do not; and consequently
we shall have distinct limits for grouping the dialects spoken by
separate individuals into those spoken by separate districts--that is to
say, into what is most commonly understood when we speak of ‘dialects.’
All would now be simple and easy if lines of demarcation thus arrived at
were found to coincide with whatever peculiarities or characteristics we
happened to choose for our criteria. But the fact is that groups which
would be classed together in view of some special points of resemblance
will fall asunder when other points are considered as essential
characteristics; for the spread of characteristics derived from
intercourse with one district must frequently be checked and thwarted by
intercourse with another district that does not share the same tendency.
Thus, if we make use of the letter a to indicate a group of
individuals speaking a tongue essentially identical, employing b for
another such group, c for a third, and so on, then a and b may
very possibly correspond in usage or pronunciation in some point, x,
in which both may differ from c, while a and c, but not b, will
be found to agree in y. In yet a third point, z, in which they both
differ from a, etc., b and c may agree; whilst a, b, c and
other groups may very well have points, w, t, etc., in common with
one another and with d or e, and in these same points will differ
from f. On the other hand, f may agree in some other points with
a, in some with b, in some with c, etc.
It is unnecessary to dwell further on this. We see plainly that as
different alterations have a different extent and different lines of
demarcation, the crossings of groups and resemblances may be expected to
become of infinite complexity.
But if, further, we suppose the differentiation between a, b, and
c to be already so great that we may regard these as separate
dialects, yet it is by no means impossible that a tendency to some
alteration should make itself felt in each of them, or that, having
arisen in one, the peculiarity should spread over all. It follows from
this consideration that any peculiarity shared by all or many dialects
of a language is not necessarily older than one which characterises only
a few, though, of course, that such will be the case is the natural
assumption.
Nor are the most strongly marked characteristics, by whose means we now
distinguish existing dialects, and according to which we range them into
groups, necessarily older than those which we overlook in deciding these
mutual relationships. To instance this, we may refer to the various
Teutonic dialects, which undoubtedly had many marked differences long
before the process of sound-shifting began. It was some time in or near
the seventh century A.D. when some of these dialects commenced to
substitute p for b, t for d, k for g; t became ts (z),
k became h, p became f or pf, and in some cases b and g
were substituted for the sonant fricatives v and g.[3] This change
or sound-shifting was in progress during something like two centuries,
and it is according to the extent of their participation in this that we
classify the various dialects as High German, Middle German, and Low
German, respectively. We consequently class as Low German three dialects
which otherwise present very strongly marked differences: the Frisian,
the Saxon, and in part the Franconian, the case of which last is
especially instructive.
The Franconian dialect did not as a whole participate in the changes to
which we have alluded above. Only the more southern part of the
Franconian tribe adopted the sound-shifting, in common with other
southern tribes which spoke distinctly different dialects. Consequently,
adhering to our above-mentioned principle of classification, we must
class the so-called Low Franconian in a group totally distinct from
that in which the High Franconian must be placed, notwithstanding the
fact that in other respects these dialects have preserved many important
resemblances.
It would also be incorrect to regard dialects which have become more
strongly differentiated than others as having necessarily become so at
an earlier date. The widest divergence is not necessarily the oldest,
for circumstances may arise to facilitate the widening of a recent
breach, as they may, on the other hand, arise to prevent a slight
divergence of long standing from becoming a gap of importance. If two
groups, a and b, are differentiated, and yet keep up sufficient
intercourse, they may very well remain similar, though not equal, during
a very long period; while a subdivision of a, which circumstances only
affecting a minority in that group have separated later, may develop a
rapidly increasing divergence between its small community on the one
hand, and the remaining members of a together with the whole of b on
the other.
One more lesson resulting from the foregoing consideration is the
following. It is too often assumed as a matter of course that the speech
of districts lying between others that possess strongly differentiated
languages is the result of the contact and commixture of the two latter.
Such possibility is indeed not denied; it, in fact, often occurs; but
the alternative supposition that the mixture is a survival of some
intermediate dialect is equally possible, and must not be forgotten.
It is clear that what we now call languages are merely further
developments of dialects; but here once more we may easily err by
assuming too much. If we find two distinct languages, it does not
necessarily follow that they have passed through a stage in which they
were two dialects, distinct indeed, but differing to a less extent than
at present. Indicating dialects by a and b, and languages by A and
B, we must not conclude, on meeting with the two latter, that A must
have inevitably originated from a, and B from b. It is quite
possible that both A and B may have arisen from (say) a alone; and
of this possibility Anglo-Saxon and its descendant Modern English
furnish a clear instance.
The dialect spoken by the invaders differed, if at all, in a very slight
degree from the Frisian (a), which followed a regular course of
development in its ancestral home. But the language of the invaders
(which, in view of its identity or close resemblance with the Frisian,
we may also call a) had in the British Islands a different history and
a different development. It was rapidly differentiated, and one of its
dialects became a literary language, distinct in every point from its
sister-tongue. Thus the modern representative of Frisian (A), and our
present literary English (B) are found to have sprung from one source
(a) alone.
The consideration of this case leads us to our next point. In all the
foregoing cases we presupposed that the speakers of the individual
language or of the group-languages were on the whole stationary. We need
not here indicate at length the effect upon a community of its migration
into regions where other languages are prevalent. The result is commonly
a mixed language: and the subject of so-called mixed languages we
reserve for another chapter: here we need only remind the student that
by such migrations the connection of the language of the emigrants with
that of other communities of similar speech is loosened, and the action
of differentiating forces, which thus acquire free and unrestricted
play, must necessarily be augmented.
The criterion for distinction of dialects among a community of
individual languages is, and must be, their phonetic character.
Vocabulary and syntax are easily and generally maintained, or, if
anything new arises, it may possibly spread over wide areas; but
differences of pronunciation and peculiarities of utterance do not
necessarily result from the borrowing of new terms.
For instance: a community which pronounces a of father as aw
(i.e. like a in all) will do so even when borrowing a word from
some dialect in which the pure a is usual.
In conclusion, we must not omit to combat an error too often repeated in
books on language which enjoy a reputation otherwise well-deserved. It
is a common notion that the tendency to differentiation is, as
civilisation advances, replaced by one towards unification; in proof of
which we are reminded of the one uniform literary language which, among
the educated members of a nation, replaces the various provincial
dialects. But this literary language is by no means a regular and
natural development of the pre-existing dialects.
One of these, favoured by circumstances political or literary, obtains
a supremacy which causes its adoption by those who would otherwise
ignore it and continue to speak the dialects of their own provinces,
counties, or districts. Hence it is in a certain sense a foreign tongue
to them, and though in course of time it may come to replace the
indigenous dialect of any district, so that scarcely a trace of the
latter remains, it would be misleading to say that this dialect has
developed into a language before which it has in reality disappeared.
Language is in a constant state of change; and the changes to which it
is subject fall under two very different heads. In the first place, new
words find their way into a language, whilst existing words become
obsolete and drop out of existence: and, secondly, existing words
remain, but gradually alter their pronunciation. It is the second of
these phenomena which we have to study in this chapter; and a clear idea
of its nature, origin, and progress is indispensable to any real
knowledge of philology.
To gain this idea we must carefully consider the processes which occur
when we speak. We have to take note of no less than five elements, all
of which are present each time that we utter a sound, and these should
be carefully distinguished.
In the first place, whether we break silence and begin to speak, or
proceed in the course of speaking to any particular sound, our vocal
organs must move towards a certain position, in which they must remain
during the time of the utterance of the sound. This is equally true
whether they are set in motion after a period of rest, or after a
position rendered necessary by their utterance of some other sound. Let
us take, for instance, the sound which in the word father we
represent by the letter a. In pronouncing this WORD we BEGIN by
putting our lips, tongue, vocal chords, etc., all in such a position
that, on the breath passing through them or coming into contact with
them, the sound represented by f is produced; and as long as the vocal
organs remain in that position, nothing but f can be pronounced. In
order, then, to pronounce the a sound, we must alter the position of
our vocal organs: our vocal chords must be approximated, our lips
relaxed, our mouth opened wider, until the a position is attained. It
is clear that the course which we take to reach our goal depends not
merely upon the position of that goal, but likewise upon the point
whence we start to reach it. Hence the course whereby we reach this a
position will vary constantly and considerably, seeing that in our
utterance of the a sound we can and do cause many other sounds to
precede it. But all these movements agree in one respect, that they
terminate in a certain position, which we maintain as long as the a
sound lasts.
Secondly, we must notice that this position is maintained only by a
certain balance of the tension in the various muscles of our tongue,
throat, lips, etc.; and this tension, though we may not indeed be
conscious of it, we feel.
Thirdly, we hear, more or less exactly, the sound which we produce.
Fourthly, this feeling and this sound, like every physical occurrence in
which we actively or passively participate, leave behind them in our
mind a certain impression. This impression, though it may indeed
disappear and sink beneath the level of consciousness, remains
nevertheless existent, is strengthened by repetition, and can, under
certain conditions, be again recalled to consciousness. We consequently
come gradually to acquire a permanent mental impression of both feeling
and sound. There is formed in our mind what we may call the
memory-picture of the position; and
Fifthly, there is likewise formed ‘a memory-picture’ of the sound.
It will be readily seen that of these five ‘elements’ only the last two
are permanent, and that they, and they only, are psychical. In every
individual case of sound-utterance, all that is physical is momentary
and transitory. We abandon the position; the corresponding tensions make
way for others; the sound dies away: but the memory-pictures alike of
position and sound remain in our mind. There is no physical connection
between our utterances of the ‘same’ sound, or word, or phrase; there is
only a psychical connection: and this reposes upon the two elements
which we have already called the memory-pictures of sound and position
respectively.
A word must be added on the nature of the association existing between
these two. This association, however intimate it may be, is external
only; there is no necessary psychical connection between any sensation
of vibration in our organs of hearing and any other sensation of tension
in the muscles of our vocal organs. If we gained the first-named
sensation again and again from hearing others speak, yet we should still
be unable to imitate them at once, even though, for whatever reason, we
had set our vocal organs repeatedly in the same position. But the fact
that when we ourselves utter a sound we also hear it, associates the
physical sensations of sound with those of position, and this
invariably; and it thus happens that the respective memory-pictures of
the two are left closely associated in our mind.
When we speak of these movement- and sound-pictures as lingering or as
existing in our memories, it is not implied that we are necessarily
conscious of their existence. On the contrary, the speaker, under
ordinary circumstances, is wholly unconscious of them: nor has he
anything like a clear notion of the various elements of sound which
together make up the spoken word, or it may be the sentence, which he
utters. It would seem as though the art of writing and spelling, which
presupposes some analysis of the sound of words, proved that the
speaker, if capable of spelling and writing, must have at least some
notion of those elements. But very little consideration will suffice to
prove the contrary. In the first place, strictly speaking, it is
absolutely impossible to denote in writing all the various elements of
sound which combine to form any word or sentence. A word, however
correctly and grammatically spelt, does not consist merely of those
sounds which we symbolise in our writing. In reality it consists--or at
least the syllable consists--of an unbroken series of successive
sounds or articulations, and of this series, even if we spell
‘phonetically,’ our letters represent at best no more than the most
clearly distinguished points; whereas, between these sounds so
symbolised by our letters, there lie an indefinite number of transition
sounds, of which no writer or speller takes any notice.
The above is true in the case of languages like Spanish, Portuguese,
Italian, and German, where the spelling is more or less consistent: much
more is it true in the case of English or French, with their irrational
and puzzling inconsistencies. A child which learns that it must
represent the sound of the word but by letters to be called
respectively bee-you-tea, or the word though by letters nick-named
tea-aitch-o-you-gee-aitch, does not receive a lesson in separating the
sound-group represented by the letters but into its three, or the
sound-group represented by though into its two (or three) elements.
Even in the more correctly spelt languages, there are numerous
discrepancies between the spoken and written word, which, until they are
pointed out to him, escape the attention of the native speaker or
writer. In English, some instances may be here considered. Not a few
English people are quite surprised when they are informed that they have
two distinct ways of pronouncing th, or of pronouncing x: the th
‘hard,’ as in thin, and ‘soft,’ as in then; the x like ks, as in
execution (eksekyushion), and like gz, as in executive
(egzekyutiv), exact (egzakt), example (egzampl). And there are fewer
still who have ever noticed that in income many pronounce no n at
all, but the same guttural and nasal sound as terminates king.
Can is frequently pronounced c^han, with a distinct h sound after
the c, without the speaker being aware of it; and the same holds good
of similar words. Again, none but the trained observer knows that the
k in keen is pronounced differently (more to the front of the mouth)
from the k (represented by c) in cool; but the fact that perhaps
more than all excites incredulous wonder is that the sound i is no
vowel, but a diphthong, as may be proved by dwelling on it. The speakers
to whom these facts are new may nevertheless all be perfectly correct
speakers: no doubt they pronounce the elements of the word; but they
have probably never paid any attention to the nature of these elements,
or at least have not begun to do so till long after the utterance became
habitual and natural.
If, then, we speak without consciousness of the separate sounds, much
more are we completely unconscious of the movements of our vocal
organs. It is only very recently that these movements have been
carefully investigated, and the results of the science of phonetics are
in very many respects as yet sub judice, while even the most
superficial knowledge of the subject can only be attained by a conscious
and careful effort of attention, and by the exercise of much patience in
the observation of our precise actions when speaking. It is only the
trained observer who can at all follow these movements as he makes them,
and even he does not so follow them generally, but thinks of the sense
of his words as he speaks, and not of the way in which they are
produced.
Moreover, even assuming that the speaker enjoyed a far higher degree of
consciousness, both of phonetic elements and of phonetic movement while
he is acquiring the faculty of speech, it would none the less remain
true that in the ordinary course of word-utterance these facts remain
outside the speaker’s consciousness. A precisely parallel instance can
be observed in the case of a pupil learning to play the piano or violin.
At first every movement he makes is the result of a separate and
conscious act of volition; but soon practice, the repetition of
conscious action, so much facilitates the playing of scales, arpeggios,
etc., that the rapidity of their execution quite precludes all
possibility of the bestowal of separate thought, even of the shortest
duration, upon each individual note in succession. It is necessary at
the outset to insist on this fact of the speaker’s unconsciousness, both
of the elements of sound which make up the word, and of the movements of
his vocal organs; for, once fully grasped, it will guard against an
error which is too prevalent, viz. that sound-change is the result of
conscious volition in those who speak.
But though the movements necessary for production of sounds are
performed unconsciously, they are by no means beyond control; to
illustrate which fact we may once more recur to the parallel instance of
the piano-player. Like him, the speaker controls his work by listening
to its result: but the player strikes either the right note or the
wrong, and, unlike him, the speaker may vary his utterance in one
direction or another without serious error; he is not considered to make
a MISTAKE unless the difference between his present utterance and that
which is usual exceeds a certain limit. In this respect, the
violin-player resembles the speaker more closely. They both appeal to
their sense of hearing in order to decide on the correctness or
otherwise of the sound produced, and the control they can exercise over
that sound is exactly proportional to their delicacy of ear. Up to
certain limits, the variations are too small to be perceived by the ear,
but beyond these, control becomes possible. The slight differences in
pronunciation or sound do not yet, however, necessarily expose the
speaker (or player) to the charge of incorrect utterance (or
performance), and consequently, though he perceives the change, he pays
little or no attention to it. He only then corrects himself or guards
against repeating the ‘mistake,’ when the change in sound passes those
limits which cannot be transgressed without detriment to what in music
we term ‘harmony,’ or what in language we term ‘correctness of
utterance.’ It commonly happens that these limits are wider than the
limits of perception referred to above, more especially in the case of
the speaker. A wider licence is accorded to the term ‘correctness’ in
speech than is accorded to it in harmony.
While, then, control is theoretically and practically limited, the
possibility of variation is unlimited. Take, for instance, the case of
the vowels. All the possible sounds and variations from u (pronounced
as oo in cool) to i ( ee in feel) may be said to form one
uninterrupted series. In this series we distinguish only some of the
most important varieties. When we pronounce u, the lips are rounded,
and the tongue is drawn back and raised at the back of the mouth: if we
pass from u to i, the lips are unrounded, and assume the shape of a
narrow and much elongated ellipse, while the tongue is pushed forward
with its back depressed and the fore-part (the blade) raised. While this
change is going on, the mouth never assumes a position with which we
could not produce some vowel or other, but the difference in acoustic
quality between any two ‘neighbouring’ vowels would not always be such
that we should regard them as distinct or different sounds. On our way
from u to i, we pass through the positions for the o (oa) in
coal, the ŏ in god, the a in father, the ĕ in net, the e
(a) in hare, the ĭ in pit; but between these there lie an
indefinite number of possible shades of sound, and every one knows how
differently various speakers of the same community pronounce what we
call the same vowel. So, too, we need but little attention to notice
distinct occasional variations, at different moments, in the same
speaker. If, then, one and the same speaker often perceptibly (though
unintentionally) varies his pronunciation, we may be perfectly sure that
his mode of utterance will vary at different times within those limits
where the divergence--though existing--is not noticed. As with the
vowels, so it is, though not so completely, with many consonants and
series of consonants. The student who is unacquainted with phonetics
should pronounce cool and keen one after the other, or better still
coo and kee, getting rid of the final consonants. He will have no
difficulty in noticing the difference between the two k sounds, the
first of which requires a much more backward position than the second
for its pronunciation. After a little practice, he will be able to
pronounce the first (back) k with the ee vowel, and the second
(forward, palatal) k with oo. Now, between these two sounds of k
there is a whole series of intermediate ones, and, if this series be
followed in the direction of the palatal k and then continued beyond
it, we soon reach the articulation of the palatals proper, and pass,
without any appreciable gap, to the linguo-dentals: first to the t
which, in words like the French métier, sounds so much like q in the
form méquier (as the French Canadians actually pronounce it); and next
to our own t, and to the usual French t, which is pronounced more to
the front with the tip of the tongue against the roots of the teeth.
Similarly, because perfect though slight closure is not remote from
extreme narrowing, we can pass in a practically unbroken series from
energetic p to laxly uttered f, from k to the guttural fricative
of German ach--a sound which English, in its modern form, no longer
possesses,--etc.
As we noticed in the instance of k, and as every one more easily
perceives in the case of the vowels, two sounds essentially different in
articulation and in acoustic character are often, in daily speech,
accepted as identical, more especially where the difference is not great
enough, or is not of a nature to cause ambiguity of meaning. If, for
instance, there existed words in the English language alike in all
respects but that the one began with the k of cool and the other
with the k of keen, and if these words had different meanings, every
Englishman would be aware of the existence of two sounds, which he would
most likely indicate by two different letter-signs. As it is, the
difference between the two remains unnoticed, and the choice between
them depends upon the vowel which follows. If, then, in the ordinary
course of speaking, a ‘back’ k is pronounced a little more forward, or
a palatal k more to the back, no notice will be taken of it, unless
the variation oversteps a certain limit and, as a consequence, the
unusual articulation sounds strange. Similarly, for the formation of
t, the position of the tongue may be varied to a very great extent,
and yet, though something unusual in the sound MAY be apprehended, the
result will always be perceived as a t.
We must now once more emphasise the fact that the memory-picture of the
sound, and the (unconscious) memory-picture of the movement and
position, and these two alone, connect the various utterances of any
sound or sound-group, and decide its character, and the appreciation of
speaker and hearer to its correctness.
These memory-pictures and their nature and growth are therefore of the
highest importance. They are the results of all preceding cases of
utterance, of which, however, the last always has the greatest
influence. Every variation in pronunciation entails a variation in the
memory-picture; and this, small as may be the change, is cumulative and
permanent, unless the different deviations happen to balance one another
exactly. Now, in the main this will be the case when the speaker finds
himself amid his usual surroundings, and where no external causes
co-operate to impel his deviations into one direction rather than into
another: but let us suppose him transferred to another community, and
brought in contact with a certain pronunciation habitual there and novel
to him. His memory-picture of the SOUND is made up of his own
pronunciation and of what he hears from others. At first the new
pronunciation strikes him as new, and two pictures stand side by side
in his mind. If, however, the difference be not too great, these soon
blend, and, the former one fading while the other constantly gains in
force, his pronunciation becomes influenced without his own knowledge;
he pronounces more and more like the surrounding speakers, and every
time he does so his memory-picture of POSITION gets slightly altered
(always in the same direction) until nothing but conscious effort of
memory or renewed intercourse with former surroundings can recall the
one thus lost.
The same thing happens essentially and effectually, though the change is
slower and less violent, where external causes favour deviation in any
special direction amongst an entire community. As far as the nature of
the effect goes, it can make no difference whether we consider the case
of a man entering a new community to find there a pronunciation which
differs from his own, or that of an entire community which alters its
existing pronunciation. But the process will go on much more slowly in
the latter case, since it has to operate in a number of individuals, and
the steps by which each of them proceeds are in ordinary cases
imperceptibly small.
Of all causes which may tend to alter our pronunciation in any special
direction, facility of utterance is the most conspicuous and the most
easily understood. There are, in all probability indeed, several others:
climate, habits of diet, etc., all seem to have some effect, but no
one has as yet been able to explain how they operate. Even ease of
pronunciation is not yet thoroughly understood in all its bearings. We
must not forget that ease is something essentially subjective, and that
the memory-pictures of movement and sound and the attempt at correct
reproduction of the usual movement and sound are the main factors,
while the striving after facility of utterance is a very subordinate
one.
Yet there is no doubt whatever that in a number of instances the new
pronunciation is easier than its predecessor: we now say last instead
of latst, examples of which earlier form may be found in the Ormulum,
for instance. Similarly, best is easier than betst, impossible
than inpossible; and we may refer also to the numerous words still
written with a gh which is no longer pronounced. In the word knight,
the k was formerly sounded before the n, and the gh represents a
sound which may still be heard in the German word knecht; and, in
fact, all spellings like know, gnat, night, though, etc., with
their numerous mute letters, represent older and undoubtedly more
laborious pronunciations. That all these sounds have been dropped has
unquestionably facilitated the utterance of the words, and there is a
similar gain of ease in all the well-known instances of complete or
partial assimilation in all languages. So in Italian otto for Latin
octo, Latin accendo for adcendo, etc. When, however, we come to
estimate the comparative facility of separate single sounds, or even
many combinations, we find ourselves as yet without any certainty of
result or fixed standard. Much that has been advanced is individual and
subjective: all depends on practice; and this practice we acquire at an
age when we are as yet wholly unable to form or pronounce an opinion on
any question. In fact, most of our facility of speech comes to us in
infancy.
But whatever the cause, we now understand that the memory-picture of
movement and position is shifting and unstable in its very nature.
Unless the majority of pronunciations around us all alter in the same
direction, the sound-picture does not alter, and it exerts a
retarding control upon the rapidity with which our position-picture,
and therewith our own pronunciation, might otherwise do so. Here,
however, we must draw attention to the fact that we spoke of the
majority of pronunciations around us and not of speakers. For our
sound-picture the number of persons from whom we hear a word is
immaterial; it is the number of times we hear it pronounced that is
alone of importance.
All that we have hitherto said has had reference to changes of
pronunciation in the same speaker, and in this case alone can we speak
of alteration or change in the strict sense of the word. But when we say
that ‘a language has altered,’ we use the term in a wider sense, and
include the case when one generation is found to use a new pronunciation
in place of one current at a former time; when, in fact, it would be
strictly correct to say that an old pronunciation has died out, and that
the new one--created instead--differs more or less from that which was
its model.
A child, in learning to speak, attempts to imitate the sound it hears;
and, as long as the resulting imitation sounds sufficiently correct,
any small peculiarity of pronunciation is generally overlooked. In such
a case, therefore, the child acquires a movement or position-picture
which at once materially differs from that of the former generation. We
all know by experience that sounds are difficult to ‘catch,’ and we must
remember that the vocal organs may undergo certain variations in
position without producing a correspondingly large difference in
acoustic effect;[4] and further, that any sound produced by a
particular position of the vocal organs has a tendency to change in a
different direction and at a different rate from the course which would
seem natural to the same sound if it had been produced by a different
position of the vocal organs.
If, then, we speak a word to a child, and if the child utters it (a)
with a slightly altered pronunciation, and (b) with an articulation
which differs from that which WE should naturally employ to produce the
pronunciation which the child gives to the word, then two comparatively
important steps upon the path of change have already been taken. And
thus it is clear that, though changes in language are constantly and
imperceptibly occurring throughout the whole life of the individual
speaker, yet their rise is most likely and their progress is most rapid
at the time when language is transferred from one generation to another.
The above, however, will not explain all the changes which words have
undergone. There are some which have hitherto resisted any other
explanation than this: they appear as the results of repeated errors of
utterance, which errors, owing to particular circumstances attending
each case, must have been committed by several or by most of the
speakers of the same linguistic community. Such are--(1) Metathesis,
i.e. where two sounds in the same word reciprocally change their
positions, whether they are (a) contiguous or (b) separated by other
sounds. Of the first kind we have instances in the Anglo-Saxon forms
ascian and axian, both of which occur in extant documents, and also
survive in the verb ask and the provincial equivalent aks. Cf. also
the form brid, found in Chaucer, for bird (e.g. ‘Ne sey I neuer er
now no brid ne best.’--Squire’s Tale, 460), and, vice versâ, birde
for bride (e.g. Piers Plowman, 3, 14: ‘ðe Justices somme Busked hem
to ðe boure ðere ðe birde dwelled’). Again, we may compare the English
bourn, Scotch burn, with Dutch bron, German brunnen; A.S.
irnan and rinnan, both meaning to run, and irn, as pronounced by
a west-countryman, with run.[5]
Of the second kind of Metathesis (b) we find traces in O.H.G. erila,
by the side of elira  N.H.G. erle and eller; A.S. weleras, the
lips, as against Gothic wairilos; O.H.G. ezzih, which must have had
the sound of etik before the sound-shifting process began,  Lat.
acetum; the Italian word, as dialectically pronounced, grolioso 
glorioso; and, again, crompare  comprare; M.H.G. kokodrille 
Lat. crocodilus. We may also refer to such cases of mispronunciation
as indefakitable for indefatigable. These are evanescent, because
they meet with speedy correction.
Besides Metathesis, we must class here (2) the assimilation of two
sounds not standing contiguous in the word (as Lat. quinque from
*pinque; original German finfi (five)  *finhwi, etc.), and (3)
dissimilations, as in O.H.G. turtiltûba, from the Lat. turtur; Eng.
marble, from Fr. marbre, Lat. marmor; M.H.G. martel with
marter, from martyrium; prîol with prîor; and conversely, M.H.G.
pheller with phellel, from Lat. palliolum; O.H.G. fluobra,
‘consolation,’ as against O.S. frôfra and A.S. frôfor; M.H.G.
kaladrius with karadrius; Middle Lat. pelegrinus, from
peregrinus.
We must now conclude this chapter with a few words on the question, Are
the laws of sound-change, like physical laws, absolute and unchanging?
do they admit of no exceptions? In thus stating the question, we
challenge a comparison between physical laws and the laws of
sound-change, but we must never forget the essential difference existing
between them. Physical laws lay down what must invariably and always
happen under certain given conditions; the laws of sound-change state
the regularity observed in any particular group of historic phenomena.
We must, in dealing with this question, further distinguish between two
closely allied but not identical kinds of phenomena, i.e. between
those which come under the law of sound-change in the strict sense of
the word, and those which are rather to be considered as instances of
sound-correspondence or sound-interchange. When, for instance, some
sound happened to be, at any particular stage of some language,
identical in the various forms of the same word; and if this sound,
owing to difference in its position, or of its accent, or from some
other cause, has changed into a different sound in some forms of the
word, while in other forms of the same word it has remained unchanged;
and if many similar cases are remarked in the same language,--we
summarise them in our grammars in a form which, though convenient, is
not strictly correct. There are in French, for instance, many adjectives
which form their masculine termination in f and their feminine in
ve. It is scarcely necessary to point out that in these words the
feminine form, derived as it is from the Latin feminine, cannot
correctly be described as derived from the masculine in its
contemporaneous form: nor yet does the individual speaker, in using the
two genders, derive the one from the other; he reproduces both from
memory, or, possibly by a process to be discussed in Chapter V., he
produces one by analogy with other similar forms.
We nevertheless lay it down in our grammars, that adjectives in f form
their feminine by ‘changing’ f into ve. The correspondence of sounds
which we thus register, though it is a consequence of phonetic
development, does not, strictly speaking, express a law of sound-change;
we might call it ‘a law of sound-correspondence’ or ‘sound-interchange.’
The ‘law of sound-interchange’ states in a convenient form the aggregate
results of events which have occurred in accordance with some ‘law of
sound-change.’ Our question, then, refers to the ‘laws of sound-change’
proper, and not to those of ‘sound-interchange;’ and if we say that a
law of sound-change admits of no exceptions, we can only mean that,
within the limits of some definite language or dialect, all cases which
fulfil the same phonetic conditions have had the same fate: i.e. the
same sound must there have changed into the same other sound throughout
the language, or, where various sounds are seen to replace one and the
same other sound of the older language, the cause for this difference
must be sought in the difference of phonetic conditions, such as accent,
contact with or proximity to other sounds, etc.
It must be clear, after all that has been said in this chapter, that
laws of sound-change, in the correct meaning of this term, must be
consistent and absolutely regular. As regards the case of the individual
speaker, we have seen that the utterance of each sound depends on the
memory-picture of motion and position, and that these pictures exert
their influence without the speaker being conscious of it. It will then
naturally follow that if these pictures alter gradually in the case of
any one sound in any one word, they will do so for the same sound in all
other cases where it occurs under like conditions.
It is indeed often stated that the sense of etymological connection of a
particular word with others which retain a certain sound unaltered may
prevent that sound from taking the same course in that word as it does
in other words not so influenced; but the existence and efficacy of some
counteracting influence does not disprove the existence of the force
against which it operates, and which it overcomes or neutralizes. Nor,
again, could the inter-communication between the individual speakers
cause occasional suspension of the law of sound-change.
We have seen that the association which arises between memory-pictures
of the sound, and of the motion of our vocal organs, etc., for its
utterance, is--though but external--nevertheless very close, and that it
soon becomes indissoluble. The slight and gradual changes in the
utterance of the surrounding speakers alter the memory-pictures of the
sound, and the corresponding memory-picture of motion and position
follows in the same way. It is, then, only in case of mixture of
dialect, i.e. when a considerable group of speakers of one dialect
becomes mixed and scattered among speakers of another, that the
following generation may adopt one sound from the one dialect and
another from the second; thus apparently exhibiting the differentiation
of the same sound, under the same phonetic circumstances, into two, of
which the one appears as the rule, the other as the exception. But then,
again, such a case--though when it has happened we may not always be
aware of it, and consequently may not always be able to assign the
phenomenon to its true cause--does not prove that the law of
sound-change admitted of exception. We merely have the results of two
such laws mixed and confused.
Sound-change is brought about by the repeated substitution of a sound or
sounds almost imperceptibly differing from the original. The A.S.
hláfmesse is now represented by the English Lammas: though the mm
sound is clearly easier to pronounce than the combination represented by
fm, generations passed away before the word as we have it in English
became the recognised form. In the case of sound-change, we must notice
that the rise of the new sound is simultaneous with the disappearance of
the old one. In the case of change of signification, it is possible for
the old meaning to be maintained by the side of the new one; as when we
speak of ‘the House,’ meaning the House of Parliament, we do not exclude
the original and proper meaning of the word, but we merely narrow and
define its signification. Indeed, change in signification consists
invariably in a widening or narrowing of the extent of the
signification, corresponding to which we find an impoverishment or an
enrichment of the contents. As we saw that the employment of ‘House’ to
denote the House of Parliament implied a narrowing or specialising of
the extent of the signification of the ordinary meaning of house, so
we may take a word like moon, properly and originally applied only to
the earth’s satellite, and apply it to a whole class, which we regard in
some way as resembling it, as when we speak of Jupiter’s moons. In
this case we widen the application of the word by narrowing its
contents, but even when thus widened the meaning still includes its
original denotation. Frequently such a widened application becomes once
more narrowed, by the widening of the contents: an instance of this
double process we have, e.g., in the word crane.[6] Originally only
meaning the bird of that name, it was, by a metaphor, applied to a class
of objects similar in some respects to the bird. A process of narrowing
this application led to the use of the word as a specific name for a
certain machine. The word, in this sense, no longer includes its
original meaning, and is transferred. It is only by such a succession of
widening and narrowing that a word can assume a signification absolutely
different from its original meaning. This transference may be more or
less occasional, or become usual. Thus in the case of green for
unripe (cf. blackberries are red when they are green) the meaning is
in a certain sense an ‘occasional’ one, the real and original meaning
being still clearly felt. This original meaning is, however, quite lost
sight of when we use grain in to dye in the grain, for ‘to dye of a
fast colour’ by means of cochineal, etc., grain here being the name
given to fibre of wood, etc.[7]
Change in signification, however, has this in common with sound-change,
that it is effected by individual usage which departs from the common
usage; and that this departure passes only gradually into common usage.
Change in signification is a law of language; it is a necessity: and
change is rendered possible by the fact that the signification attaching
to a word each time it is employed need not be identical with that which
usage attaches to it. As we shall have to consider this discrepancy, we
shall employ the expressions ‘usual’ and ‘occasional’ signification: and
by the ‘usual’ we shall understand the ordinary or general
signification; by the ‘occasional’ we shall understand that which the
individual attaches to it at the particular moment when he uses the
word. The ‘usual’ signification means, as we employ it, the entire
contents of any word as it presents itself to a member of any linguistic
community: the ‘occasional’ signification means the contents of the
conception which the speaker, as he utters the word, connects therewith,
and expects the listener to connect with it likewise. The word shade,
used by itself and without any interpretation from the context or the
situation, would suggest to a hearer its USUAL signification of
‘interruption of light;’ but the individual who employs the word may
have in mind, as he may easily disclose, the shade of a tree or a
lamp-shade.
The ‘occasional’ signification is commonly richer than the ‘usual’ one
in content and narrower in extent. For instance, the word in its
occasional sense may denote something concrete: while, in its usual
sense, it denotes something abstract only; i.e. some general
conception under which different concrete conceptions may be ranged. By
a ‘concrete’ conception is here meant something presupposed as actually
existing, subject to definite limits of time and space; by an
‘abstract’ one is here meant a general conception, the contents of a
mere idea and nothing more, freed from all trammels of time and place.
The House of Commons is concrete: a house is abstract. This division
has nothing to do with the ordinary division of substantives into
abstract and concrete. The substantives which in ordinary grammar we
call ‘concrete’ often denote a conception as general as the so-called
abstract nouns; as in England’s battles: and, conversely, the latter
are occasionally used as what we here call ‘concretes’ when they are
used to express a single quality or activity defined by limits of space
and time; as, The days of thy youth. In the phrase ‘My horse has run
well to-day,’ horse is concrete in the sense which we attach to the
term: but in the phrase ‘A horse has four legs,’ it is what we call
‘abstract;’ because the statement does not refer to any one definite
concrete horse, but to horses generally, and the predicate therefore is
associated with the abstract idea of horse.
The greater number of words can be employed in occasional use in either
abstract or concrete significations. There are some words, indeed,
essentially concrete, such as thou, thine, he, there, to-day,
yesterday;--which, however, need individual application to render them
immediately and definitely concrete. Words like I, here, there,
serve to define some one’s position in the concrete world; but it
requires the aid of other words, or of the circumstances in which they
are uttered, to render them thus definite. Even our demonstrative
pronouns, and the word the, may be employed to denote abstract
conceptions; as, The whale is a mammal; it has warm blood. Pity the
widow and the orphan. Even proper names, which we might be inclined at
first to take as the type of concrete words, as denoting a single
object or person, may be used either ‘usually’ as concrete, or
‘occasionally’ as abstract, since the same name may be borne by various
people and various localities, as Newton, Brighton: and, indeed, may
be applied to objects named after localities; as Stilton, Champagne,
etc. Then there is a small class of words which express an object
conceived of as existing once and once only, such as God, devil,
world, universe, earth, sun. These nouns are concrete both in
their ‘usual’ and in almost all their ‘occasional’ meanings; but even
they may be regarded as abstract if regarded from a definite point of
view. Indeed, a proper name is essentially concrete; if it becomes
abstract, this can only be because it has become a generic name, i.e.
because it has become a common noun, a common noun being such in virtue
of its standing as the name of each individual of a class or group of
things. On the other hand, there are some words which from their very
nature are abstract; such are the pronouns ever, any; the Latin
quisquam, ullus, unquam, uspiam; but the abstract character even
of words like these suffers certain limitations in occasional usage; cf.
Did he ever (i.e. on any particular occasion) act so, and Should
he ever really do it. In these cases ever is in the first instance
limited to the past, and in the second to the future.
A more important and deeper-lying distinction between ‘usual’ and
‘occasional’ signification is that a word may have various ‘usual’
significations, but can only bear a single ‘occasional’ one; i.e. in
each case of ‘occasional’ use the meaning is one and definite:[8]
except, indeed, when the word is of set purpose used ambiguously,
either to deceive, or to point a witticism; as in ‘If you get the best
of port, port will get the best of you.’ It happens in all languages
that there occur words identically pronounced which may be understood in
different significations: and, for practical purposes, we must regard
these as the same word, since whoever hears the sounds of which the word
is composed spoken cannot, without the aid of the connection, possibly
tell which of the senses is intended by the speaker to be attached to
the word. Under this head must be ranged, in the first place, words
which accidentally happen to correspond in sound, though they differ in
meaning. The English language is particularly full of such words, owing,
in some degree, to the coincidence of many words coming from Norman
French with words coming from a Teutonic source. Such are mean,
intend; mean, common; mean, moyen: match, a contest; match,
mèche: sound, son and ge-sund. We have, in these and similar cases,
instances of words which usually receive several significations. But
besides these we have numerous words in English, as in other languages,
which are etymologically identical and which yet have several
significations. Such is the word box in English: it means in the first
and most common case, ‘a chest to put things in;’ then, ‘a tree,’ ‘a
small seated compartment in the auditorium of a theatre,’ ‘the driver’s
seat on a carriage,’ ‘a present given at Christmas’ in the combination
‘a Christmas box;’ besides the meaning of a ‘box on the ear,’ which
comes from a different source. Such, too, are: post  (1) ‘A stake in
the ground,’ (2) ‘a professional situation,’ (3) ‘the system of
delivering the mails;’ broom, the shrub, and broom, ‘a besom;’
bull, ‘a papal edict’ and ‘a blunder in language;’ canon, ‘a rule’
and ‘a church dignitary;’ to bait a horse and to bait a hook; a
coach in the sense of ‘a teacher’ and of ‘a carriage;’ board, ‘a
plank’ or ‘food supplied at lodging-houses:’ so in French, un radical,
‘a root in language,’ ‘a root in algebra,’ ‘a radical in chemistry,’ or
‘a radical politician;’ plume, ‘a feather,’ and plume, ‘a pen;’ Lat.
examen, ‘swarm,’ ‘tongue of a balance,’ and ‘examination.’ It is true
that the derived meanings in these words spring from a primary one, but
it is equally true that it is impossible, without some knowledge of the
history of the word, to recognise the original connection between the
various significations; and these bear the same relations to each other
as if the identity in sound were purely accidental. This is especially
true in cases where the primary meaning has entirely disappeared, as in
the case of villain, used now only in the uncomplimentary sense which
circumstances have affixed to the word, save, indeed, in historical
treatises; though even in its early sense it is no longer ‘the man who
lives and works on the villa.’ It is the same with pagan, and
recreant. Another good illustration is afforded by the word
impertinent, which signifies (1) not pertinent (obsolete); (2) having
no special pertinency, trifling; (3) rude. Etymology, working by
comparison, often serves to detect such disappearances: thus N.H.G.
klein, small, has lost its original meaning, that still appears in
Eng. clean.
But in many cases, too, where we can still recognise the relationship of
the derived to the primary signification, we must nevertheless
acknowledge the independence of the derived meaning; especially where,
as in the case of ‘post,’ it has become the usual one. The test, in
these cases, of the independence of the word is whether a word
‘occasionally’ used in the derivative sense can be understood without
any necessity arising for the primary meaning to force itself on the
consciousness of the speaker or hearer. There are, further, two negative
tests whereby we may judge that a word has not a simple, but a complex
signification. The first of these is if no simple definition can be
framed, including the whole of its meaning, and neither more nor less;
and the second, if the word cannot, if employed ‘occasionally,’ be used
in the whole extent of its signification. It is easy to apply these
tests to the examples cited above. No simple definition of the word
post would be possible; a whole series would be necessary to explain
the meaning of the word to a foreigner. Again, any definition of the
word post used in the ‘occasional’ sense of ‘a situation’ would leave
the other meanings quite unexplained.
Even in cases where the ‘usual’ signification may be regarded as simple,
the individual meaning may vary from this and yet may not become
concrete, as it may develop on the lines of one of the special meanings
included in the general conception. Thus the simple word pin may, in
single cases, be understood as lynch-pin, hair-pin, etc.; so
bye-law is now always used as if it were a secondary law.[9]
All understanding between individuals depends upon the correspondence in
their psychical attitude. In order that a word may be understood in its
‘usual’ meaning, no more perfect mental correspondence is imperative
than such as naturally exists between the members of a single linguistic
community who have mastered their own language; should, however, the
signification of a word be specialised in ‘occasional’ use, as when we
speak of ‘the House,’ and understand thereby ‘the House of Parliament,’
a closer understanding must be supposed to exist among the speakers. The
same words may be intelligible or otherwise, or, again, may be
misunderstood, according to the state of mind of the person who is
addressed; or, again, according to the chance surroundings, whose
presence or absence may act as an aid or a drawback to the enforcement
of the signification. And it seems well in this place to emphasise the
fact that the body of ideas which may at any time be called up by a word
is never the same in the case of any two speakers. The ideas will
resemble each other less as the speakers are members of social
communities more widely separated from each other, or more in proportion
as the persons using the words possess similar degrees of cultivation or
life-experience. For instance, we may understand all the words of a
philosophic discussion, and still it may remain a mere jargon to us.
This truth holds good even for the simplest language in its simplest
stage. Hence it is that no perfect translation of a literary masterpiece
is possible; especially if such be written in the idiom of a
civilisation far removed from that of the translator, alike in the
circuit of ideas, and in the way in which these ideas present
themselves. Every expression is in fact accompanied by a store of
associative suggestion, which must suffer loss to a greater or less
extent in the attempt to insert an equivalent expression from a stranger
tongue. It thus results that the interpreter of the language of a past
civilisation must undertake by laborious study to reconstruct and attach
to each expression the body of associations which should be its native
environment. The aids necessary for understanding words in their
‘occasional’ meaning do not require to be of a linguistic nature at
all; although they may, on the other hand, be so. We have seen before
that abstract words may be rendered concrete by connecting them with
such words as essentially express the concrete, and that the article is
one of the chief of these words. Horse is abstract, but the horse is
generally, as we have seen, concrete. But even this rule is not
absolute, and consequently this aid is not absolutely sufficient; for we
have seen that in expressions like The horse is a quadruped, the
article has come to express the general conception. Again, there are
languages, like Latin and Russian, which have developed no article; and
these employ abstract words, with no special mark of denotation, for the
concrete.
In any case, whether the reference to the ‘concrete’ is expressly
denoted or not, other methods may be adopted to define it more closely.
The first of these depends upon the common environment of the speaker
and hearer, and upon the perception common to both. The hearer cannot
fail to understand the speaker if, in referring to a tree or tower, he
means the definite single tree or tower which they both have before
their eyes. The speaker may point to the object in question, or may
indicate its position by his gaze. Nay, such signs may serve to indicate
objects not directly cognisable by the senses, provided that the
direction in which these objects lie is known.
Another method whereby the word is made to refer to something definite
and concrete is found in the recalling by the hearer of the past
utterances of the speaker, or, it may be, in a special explanation which
the speaker has given. If the hearer understands that a word is once
intended to bear a concrete sense, then this same sense may continue to
attach to the word throughout the rest of the conversation. If ‘the
Church’ have once been spoken of in the sense of ‘the body of adherents
to the Church of England,’ it will be understood that this is the sense
in which the word ‘Church’ is to be apprehended for the rest of the
conversation. The recollection of the previous utterance will take the
place of immediate perception. Again, this reference to the past can be
emphasised by words like demonstrative pronouns and adverbs. If, after
using ‘the Church’ in a definite sense, I employ a phrase like ‘that
Church’ or ‘that Church of which I spoke,’ it is clear that this word
‘that,’ whose function was originally merely to express a perception,
serves in its new function to call attention to the individualisation of
the signification and to render it intelligible to the hearer.
In the third place, anything is capable of being represented and
understood as concrete, when the speaker and the hearer are so similarly
circumstanced that the same thoughts naturally rise into the
consciousness of both at once. Such agreement or correspondence depends
upon such circumstances as common residence, common age, common tastes,
business, or surroundings of the speakers. An instance of this is seen
in the rhetorical usage commonly known as κατ’ ἐξοχην. If two
people live near together in the country in the neighbourhood of a large
town, they would both certainly understand by ‘going to town’ the town
nearest to where they happen to live. If, on the other hand, they both
had their business in London, they would certainly both understand
‘London’ by ‘town.’ Again, words like the town-hall, the square,
the market are understood by the inhabitants of a particular town to
refer to the town-hall or market of that particular town. Again, such
words as the kitchen, the larder, when spoken of by members of a
family, refer to the rooms in their particular house, which they know by
these names. Thus, again, in speaking of Sunday, we mean the nearest
Sunday to the day on which we are speaking; and, in fact, the Sunday can
be fixed with perfect precision by merely affixing to the word
Sunday a word expressing past or future; as, next Sunday, last
Sunday. Words expressing relationship between persons are naturally and
without effort transferred to persons who bear such relationship to
hearer and speaker alike: and what is more, no doubt can arise from the
use of the singular, as long as there is only one person who could
naturally bear the description. Thus, if the children of a family speak
to each other of ‘father’ or ‘mother,’ this concrete reference is just
as intelligible to them as that of ‘the Queen’ or ‘the President’ to the
British or the Americans respectively. Nay, even though the relationship
exists only upon one side, whether of the speaker or the hearer, the
reference may still be equally unmistakable, assuming that circumstances
aid in pointing to the person named. If one man says to another ‘The
wife is better,’ the hearer would at once understand that the speaker’s
own wife was referred to, assuming that her illness had been
previously discussed between the two.
In the fourth place, a speaker may employ some more closely defining
word, as an epithet, in order to render his meaning more definite and
concrete. Thus he might say, That is the old king’s palace, That is
the royal castle. But even such defining epithets as these fail to give
a perfect definition unless some other aid, like the memory aid of which
we have spoken, or the aid of the situation, supports the definition. If
the speakers have been conversing about ‘the old king,’ both palace
and castle would receive a concrete significance from what had been
said before. Thus, the phrase ‘the king’s castle’ comes to mean a single
object only, when it is known that the king has only one castle, or if
the hearer be referred to a single place, where he must know the castle
to lie.
Finally, a concrete word may affect other words connected with it, and
may give them a concrete sense as well. In sentences like John never
moved a finger; I never laid hand upon him; I took him by the arm;
You hit me on the shoulder, the words finger and hand get their
concrete meaning from the subject, and arm and shoulder from the
object.[10] In French, in the sentence, Il sauta dans l’eau, la tête la
première, ‘la tête’ acquires its concrete sense from the subject.
Just as general names receive a definite concrete reference, so proper
names applicable to different persons come to denote but a single one.
It may be sufficient merely to speak of a man as ‘Charles’ in order to
sufficiently identify him; and indeed such reference would suffice if he
were before us, or had recently been mentioned. Again, even without
this, the name ‘Charles’ would sufficiently identify any person within
his own family, or within any other circle where no other ‘Charles’ was
known. Under other circumstances, we must naturally define him more
closely; as, ‘Charles the Sixth of France,’ ‘Charles the First of
England.’ Just so, there are many places bearing the same name; but a
single name is sufficient to define the place for the neighbourhood, and
even for the world at large when the place happens to be the most
important of the places called by the name: cf. Melbourne,
Brisbane, London, Strassburg: otherwise a nearer definition has to
be employed, as Stony Stratford, Newton-le-Willows.
Words are specialised in meaning in the same way as they are defined
and rendered concrete, and by the same factors. When we hear a word, we
naturally think of the most obvious and common of its various meanings,
or else of its primary meaning. In the case of ‘train,’ we think of the
means of locomotion: in the case of ‘crane’ we probably think of the
bird. Sometimes the two tendencies work together. Should several
meanings tolerably common stand side by side, the primary meaning will
commonly present itself to the mind of the hearer before the others; as
in the case of the word head used in so many metaphorical senses. But
this general rule is liable again to be altered by the surroundings amid
which the word is uttered. The situation awakens certain groups of ideas
in the mind of the hearer before the word is uttered, and itself aids
powerfully in fixing the meaning. We affix a different meaning to the
word sheet according as we hear it in a haberdasher’s shop, or on a
yacht, or at a book-binder’s: as we do to the words ‘to bind,’ according
as we hear them in a book-binder’s or in a harvest field. Different
trades and professions use the same word and affix their own meaning to
it, and no ambiguity arises in their own circle: take such words as ‘a
goose’ in the mouth of a tailor; ‘a form’ among hatters. Then, again,
the connection in which a word occurs does much to fix its meaning.
Observe how the meaning is affected by the connection in such utterances
as a good point, a point of view, a point of honour; the bar of a
river, the bar of a hotel, the bar of justice; the foot of a
mountain, the foot of a table; the tongue of a woman, a tongue of
land, the tongue of a balance; crowded ball, a round ball; a gulf
or bay, a bay and a roan; the cock crows, the cock is turned on;
ere the king’s crown go down there are crowns to be broke; the train
is starting, a train of thought; a bitter draught, a bitter
reputation; clean linen, a clean heart; a donkey-engine, John is
a donkey; the money goes, the mill goes; to stand still, to
stand upon ceremony, to stand at ease.
Cases may, however, occur in which the ‘occasional’ meaning may not
include all the elements of the ‘usual’ meaning, while it may contain
something beyond and above this. Take, for instance, the words
expressive of colour, such as blue, red, yellow, white, black.
These words may be used to denote colours which, according to their
simple meaning, they are inadequate to denote. Each colour may be mixed
with another colour, and there must arise a succession of transition
stages for which language has no name. For instance, the northern word
blae varies in meaning from the purple colour of the blaeberry to the
dull grey of unbleached cottons;[11] while the same word in old Spanish
takes the form blavo, and is found to mean yellowish grey. Three
centuries ago, auburn meant ‘whitish,’ and drab meant ‘no colour at
all’ ( Fr. drap, ‘undyed cloth’).
But the widest field for such inadequate application as that which we
have been instancing is given by words whose signification consists of a
complex assembly of ideas, as is the case, for instance, in metaphorical
expressions. Metaphorical expressions are nothing else than comparisons
instituted between groups of ideas with respect to what they possess in
common. We compare in these only certain characteristics, and we leave
the rest out of account. If we say of a man He is a fox, we mean
merely that some of the qualities which go to make up the conception of
a fox are found in the man as well. We may, indeed, express the point of
comparison between the two, as by saying He is as crafty as a fox. On
the other hand, we might say more simply He is foxy, in which case the
adjective merely denotes such a selection of the qualities of a fox as
may be necessary to characterise the man sufficiently: and, finally, we
may say He is a fox, whereby we merely mean that he is in several
respects like a fox. In this case, then, the words foxy and fox have
passed beyond the limits of their proper signification. They have come
to denote a single quality only, instead of a group of qualities, and
this signification has come to be usual.
A word may, again, pass beyond the limits of its strict signification by
the operation of what rhetoricians call synecdoche, or naming a thing
by some prominent or characteristic part of it; as, ‘A fleet of twenty
sail;’ ‘All hands to the pumps;’ ‘They sought his blood.’ In this
case, something connected spatially, or temporally, or causally with the
usual meaning is understood with the word when it is spoken.
When a word passes beyond the limits of its usual signification, it is
liable to be misunderstood, unless, indeed, some impulse be present to
serve as a sign-post to the sense in which it is intended to be used. We
are naturally inclined to use a word in its ordinary meaning and in no
other, unless, indeed, we are reminded by something that its ordinary
sense is impossible. In simple cases, such as the proverb, Speech is
silvern, but silence is golden, we think of the predicates as used
metaphorically, simply because it is impossible to think of them as used
in any other sense. But when Shakespeare talks about the majesty of
buried Denmark, each principal word in the combination serves as a
sign-post to the sense in which each other word is to be used, and we
are enabled to guess the sense which we are to attach to each word.
Repeated departures from the usual meaning--in other words, the repeated
employment of the occasional meanings of words--end in a true change of
signification. The more regularly these departures occur, the more, of
course, do individual peculiarities approximate to common use. The test
of the transition from an ‘occasional’ to a ‘usual’ meaning is whether
the employment of the ‘occasional’ meaning brings into the mind of the
speaker or hearer a previous usage with which he was familiar, and in
which he will naturally understand the word. When such recollection
naturally presents itself to the mind, and when the word is employed, as
well as understood, with no reference to the original signification of
the word, then the word may fairly be deemed to have accomplished its
transition of meaning. But it is clear that there may be many gradations
between the two usages. If I speak of sweet memories or of a bright
future, there may or may not be any recollection on the part of the
speaker or hearer that these expressions are metaphors from the use of
the word sweet and bright in a physical sense.
It must further be remarked that it is difficult for the occasional
meaning of a word to pass into the usual by the aid of an individual,
unless those to whom he speaks reciprocate the influence which he has
exerted upon them. Milton, for instance, uses such words as expatiate
and extravagant in their Latin sense, and hear in the sense of ‘to
be called;’ thus, again, Chaucer and others use copy (copia) in the
sense of plenty: but these words were not taken up by a sufficiently
large number of persons to enable their ‘occasional’ use to become
‘usual,’ even though introduced by such authorities as these.[12]
Words have a strong tendency to change their meaning when they pass into
the mouth of a new generation. A child fixes the meaning of a word by
hasty and imperfect generalisations; and not by means of descriptive or
exhaustive definitions. The simple and unreflecting mind of childhood
identifies objects on very imperfect grounds, and stays not to consider
whether there be any basis for such identification or not.[13] And thus
it is that, from the very first steps in the process of acquiring
language, the child employs the same word to define several objects, and
these not objects which really resemble each other, but which have the
appearance in any degree of doing so. Of course this whole proceeding
implies that no clear conception can exist of the contents and extent of
the usual meaning. A child conceives of a word as covering an extent
sometimes too narrow, sometimes too wide; more commonly, however, too
wide than too narrow, and the more so as the extent of his words is the
more limited. He will include a sofa under the name of a chair; an
umbrella under that of a stick; a cap under that of a hat; and
this repeatedly. Another cause of inexact appreciation of meaning is the
fact that the speaker, when indicating to a child certain objects,
connects them in his own mind with certain other objects; the child may
fail to understand the limitations of meaning to be placed upon the word
when it is parted from the idea as a whole. Take, for instance, such a
word as congregation. In the mouth of a clergyman, this word might be
used as an inseparable adjunct of a church, but he will still speak of
the congregation as distinguished from the church, and as forming a
distinct though necessary connection with the idea of ‘Church.’ The
child, generalising faultily, may apply the word congregation to a
collection of politicians, or of traders, or of animals; and it may be
long before he is in a position to correct his wrong conception. The
adult, again, constantly has to encounter the same difficulties as the
child, when he meets with words of rare occurrence or denoting technical
or complex ideas; and, supposing that he learns such words by their
occasional application only, he is exposed to the same errors as the
child. Thus the word insect has come to be so commonly used to mark
the distinction between insects and other animals, that we read on
labels, This powder is harmless to animal life, but kills all insects.
These inaccuracies in the case of the apprehension of the usual meaning
are, taken singly, of little account, and are commonly corrected by the
standard or ordinary usage which the speaker will naturally hear from
the mouths of the greater part of the community. At the same time, in
cases where a large number of individuals unite in a partial
misapprehension or in investing simultaneously a word with an
‘occasional’ meaning, it will happen that this, though only partially
corresponding with the meaning which was usual amongst an older
generation, will be substituted.
Such, among others, are the significations attaching to certain terms,
expressive of qualities ennobled by Christianity, such as humility,
faith, spiritual, ghostly, etc.
Commonly speaking, the older generation gives the main impulse to change
of meaning, controlling, as it does, the whole usage of language. But
the younger generation has great power in aiding the process of change,
from the fact that the very first time that a word has presented itself
to one of its members, the word may have been used in an ‘occasional’
sense, which would by him have been taken to be its regular use. Thus, a
child might often hear a horse spoken of as a bay, or a dolt as an
ass. In such cases he understands the secondary meaning only; nor does
he even mentally connect this meaning with any other.
The change in ‘usual’ signification, then, takes its rise from
modification in the ‘occasional’ application of the word. The most
common case of change in signification owing to such modification, is
where the meaning of the word is specialised by the narrowing of its
comprehension and the enrichment of its contents. In the English word
stamp we have a good instance of the difference between ‘occasional’
and ‘usual’ specialisation. The word may be employed of any object used
as a particular mark. It may be used for a receipt stamp or for a
bill stamp, or, again, metaphorically, as the stamp of nobility.
These are instances of ‘occasional’ specialisation. But, while it
requires some definite situation to make us think of stamp in its
other significations, it immediately occurs to us to think of it as a
postage stamp, and we then think little, if at all, of the general
idea of stamping, but rather of an object of definite shape and
construction and used for the definite purpose of franking letters. We
must thus admit that this meaning has parted from the more general
meanings, and stands independently as a special meaning; in fact, that
it is specialised and ‘usual.’ Other examples are the use of frumentum
for ‘corn’ in Latin; fruit for the produce of certain trees as
distinguished from ‘the fruits of the earth;’ pig, originally the
young of animals;--in Danish, pige, a young girl. Corn, in English,
is restricted to ‘wheat,’ and, in America, to maize, or Indian corn;
while, in German, korn denotes any species of grain: fowl, in
English, means specially ‘a barn-door fowl;’ a bird means, in the
language of sportsmen, ‘a partridge;’ a fish, ‘a salmon:’ ὄρνις,
in the conventional language of Athens, as disclosed by the
Comic poets, means ‘a barn-door fowl:’[14] and a special usage of this
kind is seen in the names of materials themselves employed to denote the
products of materials; as, glass, horn, gold, silver, paper,
copper,--as when we talk of paper in the sense of paper money, etc.
Proper names owe their origin to the change of the ‘occasional’ concrete
meanings of certain words into ‘usual’ meanings. All names of persons
and places took their origin from names of species; and the usage
κατ’ ἐξοχήν was the starting-point for this process. We are
able to observe it distinctly in numerous instances of names both of
persons and of places. Such ordinary names as the following are very
instructive for our purpose: Field, Hill, Bridges, Townsend,
Hedges, Church, Stone, Meadows, Newton, Villeneuve,
Newcastle, Neuchâtel, Neuburg, Milltown, etc. Such names as
these served in the first instance merely to indicate to neighbours a
certain person or town: and they were sufficient to distinguish such
person or town from others in the neighbourhood. They passed into
regular proper names as soon as they were apprehended in this concrete
sense by neighbours too far removed to judge of the reasons why they
received their special name: cf. names like Pont newydd: and names
like Bevan, Pritchard, from ab (son) Evan and ap Richard. There
are, no doubt, beside these, many place-names which began by resembling
real proper names, in so far as they are derived from names of persons:
such are Kingston, St. Helens.
There is also one kind of specialising process which begins to operate
as soon as ever a word comes into use. Instances of this may be seen in
the case of words which may be derived at will, according to the
ordinary laws of any language, from other words in common use, but which
are not employed till a special need calls them into play. Such words as
these are sometimes found, in the first stage of their descent from the
root-word, to bear a more special meaning than the derivative, as such,
would naturally bear. Thus the substantive formations in -er (A.S.
-er, -e)[15] denote properly a person who stands in some relation to
the idea of the root-word--commonly speaking, expressing the agent: but
in the case of single words thus terminated the most varied instances of
specialisation are found.[16] The ‘pauser’ reason (Macbeth, II. iii.
117) would naturally mean reason that pauses or halts; but Shakespeare
uses it as the ‘reason that makes us pause;’--similarly, there is no
reason why the word scholar (M.E. scolere), an imitation of Lat.
scholaris, should not signify ‘he who schools or teaches;’ but, as a
matter of fact, it always seems to have borne its present sense. In
English, indeed, it bears the special sense of ‘a student enjoying the
benefit of a foundation.’ A poulterer is one who vends poultry: a
fisher is one who tries to catch fish; a burgher, one who dwells in
a burgh; a falconer, one who trains falcons, or one who hawks for
sport: while a pensioner is one who receives a pension. Take, again,
the case of verbs derived from substantives, like to butter, to
head, to top, to badger, to earwig, to dust, to water, to
pickle, to bone (a fowl,) to skin, to clothe, to book (a
debt). In many of these cases, the meaning of the verb is derived from
a metaphorical sense of the substantive. In this case, too, the usage
can only be formed gradually, and according to the general fundamental
conditions of language.
When language demands the expression of a conception hitherto undenoted,
one of the most obvious expedients is to choose a word expressive of the
most prominent characteristics of the conception, as to name the horse
‘the swift animal’ (Sans. açvas), or the wolf the ‘grey animal’ or
‘the tearer.’ Many substantives have arisen in this way (cf. the old
terms ‘a grey’ and ‘a brock’[17] for a badger), but we must not
therefore conclude that there was any general rule for such formation;
such as, for instance, that all substantives proceeded from verbs.
The second principal kind of change in signification is the converse of
the kind already spoken of. It is where the application of the term is
limited to one part only of its original content, though such reduction
on one side is commonly accompanied by amplification on another.
The great number of phenomena occurring under this head renders it hard
to classify them: but certain ones of marked peculiarity may be
mentioned. In some cases we name the object from its appearance to our
sight: as in the case of the eye of a potato, the head or heart of
a cabbage, the arm of a river, the cup of a flower, the bed of a
river. A statue or a picture is named after what it represents; as, an
Apollo, a Laocoon, the Adoration of the Magi: or, again, a work of
art is named after its executor; as, a Phidias, a Praxiteles. In all
such cases the original signification has been limited in one direction
and amplified in another. For instance, in the case of ‘the bed of a
river,’ we exclude from consideration other beds, such as beds for
sleeping on; but, on the other hand, the word may be applied in its
novel sense to as many rivers as flow and have beds. We call a part of
one object after the part of another object which corresponds to it in
position; we talk of the neck or belly of a bottle, of the
shoulder of a mountain, the foot of a ladder, the tail of a kite.
The different uses of caput are mostly reproduced in our own use of
head; as, caput urbis; capitolium; caput fontis, fountain head;
caput montis, ρυφή; caput conspirationis; Ital. capo;
caput arboris; caput libri, chapter, κεφάλαιον; caput
pecuniæ, capital; cape. We call a measure by the name of some object
which in some way resembles it in dimensions; as, a cubit, an ell,
a foot, a barley-corn. A pen or feather writes: and so ‘a pen’
and ‘une plume’ may mean a steel pen. We transfer words expressive of
conceptions of time to conceptions of place, and vice versâ, as in
long and short; before, after; behind, before: and thus in
the case of many other adverbs and prepositions. We transfer the
impressions made on one sense to those made on another, as in the cases
of sweet; beautiful; loud (originally applicable to hearing
alone), in the phrase ‘loud colours;’ and the Fr. voyant, in such a
phrase as une couleur voyante, originally applicable to the sense of
sight alone. Words which in their proper sense denote sensual and
corporeal ideas only, are transferred to the denotation of ideas
spiritual and intellectual: as in the cases of apprehension,
comprehension, reflection, spirit, inclination, penchant,
appetite, penser (lit. peser  to weigh, etc.). Consider, again,
the various applications of such words as to feel, to see; bitter,
lovely, fair, mean, dirty, great, small, lofty, low,
warm; taste, fire, passion; to sting, to thrill, etc. Words
which properly denote one species only are given a wider extension; as,
cat, crab, apple, rose, moon (as in Jupiter’s moons),
fishery (as in whale-fishery, lobster-fishery, after the analogy of
the herring-fishery, etc.), le sanglier (l’animal solitaire,
singularis), le fromage (lac formaticum, milk made into shape),
le baudet (O.Fr. bald, baud, the spirited animal,--originally the
male ass). We make proper names pass into class names, as when we speak
of a Cicero, a Nelson, a Cato; an Academy, from Plato’s
gymnasium near Athens, called Ἀκαδημία; Palace, from
Palatium, the seat of Augustus’ Palace. Thus, again, we actually talk of
a wooden house as being dilapidated. And we have such further
development as a martinet; a cannibal; a vandal; Tom, Dick,
and Harry; John Doe and Richard Roe. Such adjectives as
romantic, Gothic, pre-adamite, may also serve as illustrations of
the development, which is also manifest in the case of sehr, ‘very,’
formerly meaning ‘painful,’ of Eng. sore, with the like use in ‘sore
afraid.’ So compare schlecht (schlechterdings, schlichten) with
slight, primitive signification ‘plain;’ silly with selig, etc.
The transference in the case of verbs is seen in such cases as ‘I was
sorry to find you out when I called;’ ‘He enjoys poor health,’ etc.
This development is similar to that illustrated above by apprehension,
reflection, etc., to which we may add understand, verstehen,
ἐπίστασθαι, transpire.
The third principal division of change in meaning is the transference
of the idea to what is connected with the fundamental conception of the
word by some relation of place, or time, or cause.
The simplest sub-division of this is when a part is substituted for the
whole--the figure called by rhetoricians synecdoche, and referred to
before on p. 58. The part is, in such cases, always a prominent
characteristic; it suggests, as a rule, that aspect of the whole which
it is desired to bring into prominence for rhetorical effect. Thus, ‘all
hands to the pumps;’ ‘they sought his blood;’ ‘the blade,’ for
‘the sword;’ ‘a maid of twelve summers.’ The German word Bein
(leg)  Eng. bone, has been thus used by synecdoche: it retains its
older value in Gebeine, Elfenbein. Persons and animals are named
after characteristic features in the body or the mind; as, grey-beard,
curly-head, thick-head, red-breast, fire-tail; a good soul, a
bright spirit: in French blanc-bec, grosse-tête, rouge-gorge,
rouge-queue, pied-plat, gorge-blanche, mille-pieds: esprit
fort, bel esprit. Names, again, are given to objects from some
prominent feature with which they are commonly connected: such are those
taken from garments; as, blue-stocking, green-domino, a red-coat,
a blue-jacket; cf. the use of un cuirassier. Other names are
transferred from one object to another included in it: such as the
town, for ‘the talk of the town;’ the smiling year, for ‘the spring;’
the cabinet, the church, the court, etc. Conversely, we find the
idea transferred from the object to its surroundings, as in the Round
Table, the Porch, the Mountain, the Throne, the Altar, etc.
Sometimes the name of a quality is transferred to the person or thing
possessing the quality, as in the case of age, youth, plenty:--
    ‘The people’s prayer, the glad diviner’s theme,
     The young man’s vision and the old man’s dream,’
as Dryden calls the Duke of Monmouth:[18] cf. also desert, bitters.
Other examples of this are--his worship, the Godhead, your
highness, his majesty, his excellence, his holiness, etc. It will
thus be seen that collective names take their rise in this way as well
as the names for single persons or things; we can speak of their
worships, meaning the magistrates. But these words do not always form
substantives.
Nouns of action suffer the same transference as names of qualities. By
nouns of action we mean names denoting activities generally, and
conditions which are derived from verbs, such as overflow, train,
income, government, providence, gilding, warning, influence.
In the instances given, the name of the action has been transferred to
its subject: but it is equally capable of being transferred to its
object, if ‘object’ be taken in the widest sense. Thus, it may be
transferred to a consequence or result of the verbal activity: such as
rift, spring, growth, a rise, assembly, union, education:
or to an object affected by the activity, such as seed, speech,
doings, lamentations, bewailings, resort, excuse, dwelling.
Writings are denoted by the name of their author; as, ‘Have you read
Shakespeare?’ A person is named after some favourite word of his own;
as, Heinrich jasomir Gott: ‘Cedo alteram’ (Tacitus, Annals, book
iii.):[19] animals are named from their utterances, in nursery language,
as a bow-wow; or from those used to appeal to them, as a gee-gee:
besides these, we may add the names of such plants as puzzle-monkey,
noli me tangere, forget-me-not, etc.
The different kinds of change in meaning may follow each other, and thus
unite. Thus the word rosary has on one side gained in comprehension,
since it is now used of a necklace composed of beads employed for a
sacred purpose; but, on the other, it has lost all connection with
roses. A horn is a wind instrument which may be, but is not commonly
made of horn: the name may equally apply to an instrument made of other
materials.
It frequently happens that some idea foreign to the essence of a word,
and connected with it merely by accident, becomes absorbed into its
signification as a mere accessory: and this is then thought of as the
proper meaning, the primary meaning being forgotten: thus names of
relations of time and place gradually pass into causal words; as,
consequence, purpose, end (to the end that), means, way.
Seeing that the unit of language is the sentence, and not the word--in
other words, that we think in sentences,--it is natural that the change
in meaning should affect, not merely the separate words, but also entire
sentences. These sentences may receive a meaning which is at the outset
merely ‘occasional,’ but which by repetition may become ‘usual’--a
meaning not implied by the combination of words as we hear it for the
first time. Take, for instance, such phrases as A plot is on foot;
The business has come to a head; He has come to the front; I have a
man in my eye; and such combinations as the following, in which the
word hand plays a great part: well in hand, off hand, hands off,
at hand, etc. We cannot say that in these cases special meanings of
the word hand have developed: rather, these meanings have become
obscured by the attention which we have come to pay to the phrase as a
whole. English is full of such terms of expression. In many of these the
sense can only be derived from the meanings of the several words by the
aid of an historical knowledge of the language in which such
combinations occur. Take such cases as, to dine with Duke Humphrey;
to tell a cock and bull story; all his geese are swans; to stuff
one up; to give one the sack; to be half seas over: in French--il
raisonne comme un tambour; sot comme un panier (for un panier
percé); triste comme un bonnet de nuit; donner une savonnade;
faire une jérémiade.
Language is incessantly engaged in an endeavour to express the entire
stock of ideas in the human mind. But it is met by the difficulty, in
the first place, that the ideas of each individual in any society differ
widely from those of the other individuals in the society: in the next
place, by the difficulty that the ideas of each individual are liable to
a constant process of expansion or contraction. The consequence is that
the ideas which language is constantly endeavouring to express are
necessarily coloured by individual peculiarities; though it is equally
true that these peculiarities are unimportant in ordinary definitions of
the meanings of single words or groups of words. For instance, it is no
doubt true that the word horse has the same meaning for everybody, in
so far as everybody refers it to the same object: but, on the other
hand, each man in his own particular line, a hunter, a coachman, a
veterinary surgeon, or a zoologist will connect with the idea a larger
quantity of conceptions than one who has nothing to do with horses. A
father would be differently defined by a lawyer and a physiologist: but
the points which in the thoughts of these make up the essence of
paternity are absolutely wanting to the consciousness of the infant who
uses the name of ‘father.’ The differences in the judgments applied to
feelings and ethics are very great, and for obvious reasons. What
different individuals understand by good and bad, virtue and
vice, is impossible to bring under one definition, indisputable and
undisputed.
The sum of the words at the disposal of any individual connects itself
with his ideas: and it thus follows that the entire store of words
forming the stock of any community must adapt itself to the whole stock
of ideas belonging to any community, and must change as these change.
The meaning of the words, again, must adapt itself to the standard of
culture attained from time to time by each nation. New words must be
created for new objects and new relations and kindred, though novel
meanings must become attached to the old words--as in the case of steel
pen, properly, ‘a steel feather.’ And again, a quantity of unobserved
changes are constantly passing on language which are hardly remarked as
such, and are the immediate result of a change in the whole culture of a
nation. Such are the words humility, talent, faith, spirit, and
the numerous other words referred to before, to which Christianity has
given a deeper and more spiritual significance. Then, again, progressive
skill may have worked striking changes in objects essentially the same:
we call a Roman trireme, a Chinese junk, and a British man-of-war by the
same name, ship; but we must admit that the ideas attaching to it have
changed considerably. And thus it is with all objects capable of
improvement by skill, and again with purely mental or intellectual
conceptions, which change according to the changing conditions of
culture of the community which possesses them.
All the ideas consciously or unconsciously present in the human mind are
directly or indirectly connected with one another. No thought, no
conception, is so independent of all others as not to suggest some other
idea or ideas in some way cognate or related. Thus, for instance, if we
think of the action of walking, it is physically impossible not to call
to mind, with more or less distinctness, the idea of a person who walks.
And again, the idea of walking is likely also to evoke the idea of some
of the varieties of that action, which we commonly indicate by such
words as (to) go, run, step, stalk, stroll, stride, etc.
Thus it is clear that our ideas associate themselves into groups; and,
as a natural result of this, the words which we employ to express these
ideas come similarly to associate themselves in our minds.
Words, then, which express related ideas, form themselves into groups.
Another source, though not equally prolific, of such association, is
similarity in sound. Thus the word book may remind us of brook, as
it in fact reminded Shakespeare; the word alarms, of ‘to arms!’ the
word hag, of rag or tag; the word blue may remind us of few.
Such groupings are, however, but very loose and ineffectual, unless a
more or less close association (based on reality or fancy) co-operates
in order to make them strong and suggestive. This may be seen by taking
as examples the associations existing between brook and book, blue
and few, on the one hand, and those existing between alarms and ‘to
arms!’ and hag, tag, and rag, on the other. There is no
similarity of meaning, no similarity of contents between the words
book and brook; the association, therefore, in this case is a very
loose one, looser than that existing between foot and boot, for
instance. On the other hand, the connection between the ideas of
alarms and ‘to arms!’ is more obvious: a sudden surprise, as in the
case of an attack by an unexpected enemy, might often be connected with
the idea of a call ‘to arms!’ Similarly, hag and rag are ideas
which often present themselves to our mind in connection with one
another, and consequently the association between these two words is
stronger than that, for instance, existing between hag and flag.
Correlation in the ideas, coupled with correlation of their contents,
especially if accompanied by similarity of sound, makes the association
most inevitable; and the closer the correlation, or the greater the
similarity, the stronger will be the tie which binds the members of the
group.
It is necessary to the more exact classification of these groups, that
we should first obtain a clear conception of the difference between what
we may call the material contents of a word, on the one hand, and the
formal or modal contents, on the other.
For this purpose, let us look at the two words father (singular) and
fathers (plural). Both these words indicate a person or persons who
stand in a certain and well-defined blood-relationship to some other
person or persons. This meaning, common to both, we call their
material contents. But the one form is used to indicate one such
individual; the other, to indicate any number more than one. This, the
unity or singularity of the one, the plurality of the other, makes
up the formal or modal contents of each. This modal part of the
contents, in most of the languages of the Indo-European stock, is left
without separate expression in the singular: in the plural, however, it
is generally expressed or indicated by some change in form; this change
being, in most cases, made by the addition of some termination--in the
example we have chosen, by the addition of s.
Before passing to another example, it is well to point out that the
modal contents of a so-called “singular-form” by no means invariably
imply unity; nor, again, is the plural always, as in the case cited,
formed from the singular. In such a sentence as A father loves his
child, the idea expressed relates, or may relate, to more than a single
father; in fact, it may be taken as a statement made correctly or
incorrectly of all fathers universally; and, with regard to the second
point mentioned, Welsh, among other languages, has many words in which
the plural is expressed by the shorter collective form, and the single
individual is indicated by a derivative, e.g. adar, birds; aderyn, a
bird: plant, children; plentyn, a child: gwair, hay; gweiryn, a
blade of hay, etc.[20]
We can now come back to our point, and fix our attention on two such
words as (I) speak and speech.
Both these words evoke the thought of some well-known and familiar
activity called into play by our vocal organs. This constitutes the
material contents of both alike. The former, however, conveys the idea
that the action is being performed at the time the word is uttered; the
other is the name of the result or product of that action. This, the
modal part of their contents, is left unexpressed; or, to speak more
accurately, we cannot divide the words so as to be able to say that one
part serves to express the material contents, and another the
modal,--a division which we could make in the case of fathers, and
which we might make in, e.g., speak, speaking; speech, speeches;
book, books, booklet; etc.
It will now be clear that, among associations based on correlation or on
similarity of IDEA, this similarity may exist between the material
contents of the words grouped together, or between their modal
contents. We therefore are now in a position to distinguish between
MATTER-GROUPS and MODAL-GROUPS.
To sum up, there exist association-groups based on--
  1. Similarity in sound only.
  2.     ”      ”  meaning only.
  3.     ”      ”  both sound and meaning.
These two latter classes (nos. 2 and 3) are subdivided, as to the part
of the meaning in which they agree, into (a) matter-groups and (b)
modal-groups.
Instances of all these are numerous, and will readily suggest
themselves; a few may suffice to illustrate further what has already
been said.
If we were to set down in a vertical column the complete conjugation of
some verb--say, of to walk,--and, parallel to this, with equal
completeness and in the same order, the conjugation of the verbs to
write, to go, and to be, we should then have in our vertical
columns four matter-groups. Taken horizontally, the separate tenses
would form so many modal-groups, each divisible into smaller groups of
singulars as against plurals, or of first persons as against second and
third persons, etc. We should then, at the same time, have illustrated
the fact that in many cases similarity of contents is accompanied by, or
perhaps we should say expressed by, similarity in sound, and that it
often happens that similar change of modal contents is accompanied by
similar change in form or in termination.
Now, this fact, though far from holding good in all cases, is of the
greatest possible importance for the development of language.
In order to realise this, let us for a moment suppose a language in
which no such ‘regularity’ held good: in which ‘I love’ was expressed by
amo; ‘thou lovest’ by petit; ‘he loves’ by audivimus; and that
thus for every thought, every shade of meaning, every modal variation
of material contents, there existed a new word in no way related to
the others which indicate associated ideas. The language would in this
case be more difficult of acquirement for those born in the country
where it was indigenous than Chinese writing and reading is to the
Chinese, and would almost defy the efforts of a foreigner to master it.
Like the Chinese, the natives would only by dint of long-continued study
be in a position to collect a scanty vocabulary, which, in the case of
the foreigner, would prove more scanty still. The picture here given of
such a language is, indeed, nowhere fully realised; but some languages
of savage tribes, in certain of their features, approximate to the
condition we have sketched. Thus, for instance, in Viti, the number
AND the object numbered are expressed together in a single word,
varying for each number in each word; thus, buru signifies ten
cocoa-nuts, koro a hundred cocoa-nuts; whilst sclavo signifies a
thousand cocoa-nuts.[21]
Strange and far-fetched as this method of forming language may seem to
us, and indeed is, it is after all merely a much exaggerated example of
what we find in all modern languages, and, e.g., in English, which,
side by side with the normal terminations to indicate gender, as in
lion, lioness, preserves such pairs as bull, cow; stag,
hind; cock, hen; etc.
Now, why should a language constructed on such principles be so
difficult to master as we have assumed it to be? Or, to put the case
differently, why should a ‘regular’ language be more easily acquired
than an irregular one? To discuss this may seem superfluous; but just
as, in Algebra, some of the most important theorems are deduced from a
thorough discussion of the principles of simple addition, so it will aid
us in language to have a clear grasp of this point, to possess a full
comprehension of the meaning of Analogy and its influence.
In our hypothetical language, every word would have to be acquired by
a new and unaided effort of memory. In actually existing languages, this
is not the case. Whether by precept or by observation, consciously or
unconsciously, whether in the process of acquiring our own language in
childhood, or in our study of a foreign tongue, we associate not only
words but also parts of words with one another and with parts of
material or modal contents of our thoughts. A child that learns to
call a single book book, and more than one, books, and to proceed
similarly in a large number of cases, comes unconsciously to connect the
s, written or spoken, with the idea ‘many of them.’ The child
attaches regularly this sound or its symbol s to any word whose plural
it needs to express; and (perfectly correctly as far as the logic of its
case is concerned) says one foot and two foots, after the model of
one boot, two boots. The child does not know that the form foots
is contrary to established usage, while the form boots is in harmony
with it; a series of corrections on the part of those who know the
established usages will gradually imprint on its memory the usual form;
but until this correction has occurred sufficiently often, the form
foots will recur in the child’s vocabulary. The sound or symbol s,
or rather the habit of adding such a sibilant to a word or words which
state something about more than one object, in order to denote
plurality, leads sometimes to its being used in cases where ‘correct’
grammar omits it. A child will form words by a simple process of
analogy, which seem curious enough to us, but are really quite simple
and natural formations. Thus, e.g. a little one spoke of
two-gas-lits, on seeing two gas-jets lit one after another; and--to
add a parallel instance of another frequent termination--another child,
when urged to ‘come on,’ replied, ‘I cannot come quickerly.’
Such formations have been represented as the result of a kind of problem
in linguistic proportion, somewhat like this:--
Given the knowledge of the formation soon, sooner; large,
larger; etc., what is the value of x in the equation:--
  Soon: sooner: :quick: x?
         Answer, quicker.
Next, given the knowledge of large, largely; nice, nicely; etc.,
what then is the value of x which satisfies:--
  Large: largely: :quick: x?
         Answer, quickly.
When combined, these two problems yield a compound proportion sum,
thus:--
  Large: larger  } : : quick: x.
  Large: largely }
To this, the answer would be quickli-er or quick-er-ly, and logically
either answer is perfectly correct; they only differ in the practically
all-important, but logically totally indifferent accident that the one
happens to be usual, while the other is opposed to the normal usage.
In order to fully realise how readily such forms, whether ‘correct’ or
‘incorrect,’ may be coined, we must likewise bear in mind that for the
apprehension of a child our divisions of sentences into words do not
exist at all. The sentences which a child learns to understand are, at
all events in the first instance, to its conception one and undivided,
nay, apparently indivisible aggregates of sound, conveying somehow or
another a certain notion. The infant answers to such a catena of sounds
as go-to-papa, or don’t-do-that, and run-away, long before it has
the faintest conception of the meaning of such sentences as, e.g., go
that way. It is only the incessant variations of the surroundings of a
word, while that combination of sounds itself remains unaltered,
which, by a very gradual process, brings to our consciousness the fact
that the whole sentence is made up of separate elements, and enables us
to distinguish the word as an unit of expression. This process,
however, of the discovery of such units comes about unconsciously and
tentatively; whilst by all children and many adult speakers the extent
of meaning attached to such units is very vaguely appreciated.
There is, therefore, in the linguistic history of each speaker, a
period in which such a sound-group as, e.g., noisier, seems to consist
as much or as little of two words as the group more noisy, etc. The
question then presents itself, why, at a later period, we distinguish
two words in the latter group, while we continue to regard the former
group as one? The answer to this is found in the fact that both the
sounds, noisy and more, are found to occur frequently alone or amid
totally different surroundings; they occur, however, consistently
maintaining the same meaning; whilst of noisier, the first part only
is used alone, and the sound represented by er--whilst employed with
many other words to express a similar variation of idea--can never, like
more, serve independently to indicate that variation, unaccompanied by
the sound which expresses the thought which it is desired to vary. And
the same remarks hold good for other cases.
It would, no doubt, be going too far to assert that the usual division
of words in our written language is wholly fanciful and unnatural. But
it is nevertheless true that the division is not made in speaking, nor
is it always equally present in our consciousness while we are uttering
our thoughts. The less educated the speaker--in other words, the less he
has been taught to bring reflection into play--the less active and
operative is this consciousness.
If, then, we represent the formation of such a word as quicker in the
shape of a solution of a proportion problem, the identity between the
linguistic and algebraical processes must not be too closely insisted
on. Similarly, we must not exaggerate the idea of clearness and
distinctness present to the consciousness of the speaker who expresses
the idea ‘rapid in movement’ by quick, and a higher degree of rapidity
in the movement by the addition of the word more before it, or er
after it. The fact is that no comparison is an absolute identity. Both
our descriptions of the process by which many of our words arise in our
minds, viz. the proportion, and the composition of the two elements, are
inexact in some respects; and in some respects one, in other respects
the other, will prove less faulty. If in a formation like quick,
quicker, it is more likely that the two syllables in quick-er
maintain a certain independence of signification, still no such
explanation could possibly apply to such a form as brang, heard from a
child or a foreigner, instead of brought. No simpler way of describing
this process can be found than the equation--
    Sing : sang :: ring : rang :: bring : brang.[22]
Moreover, this is doubtless the process adopted by our reasoning in
acquiring a foreign language. We are taught that To speak is to be
rendered by parler; I speak, by Je parle; I was speaking, by Je
parlais, etc.; and our teacher expects (and naturally) that, possessing
this knowledge, we shall be able, when he proceeds to inform us that
porter means ‘to carry,’ to find the as yet unknown and unheard forms
Je porte, Je portais, etc. At a later period, when we have read and
spoken the language frequently, we form many similar tenses and persons
of many verbs never or rarely encountered previously; and no speaker
could certainly affirm whether he owes the utterance of the word to his
memory recalling it into renewed consciousness, or to a process of
automatic regulation by analogy after the model of other similar and
more familiar forms.
From the above examples it may be seen that analogy is productive, not
merely of abnormal forms, but also, and even to a larger extent, of
normal forms. The operation of Analogy, however, attracts most attention
when its influence leads to the formation of unusual forms, and this
fact has prevented due credit being given to its full power and
importance. It was once usual to speak of all forms employed by any
speaker in conformity with normal usage as ‘correct;’ and of others,
formed on the model of other examples, but deviating from normal usage,
as ‘incorrect;’ in other words, as mistakes, or as formed BY FALSE
wrong and misleading, and can only be applied as expressing that the
analogy followed by the speaker in a certain case ought, for some reason
or another, not to have been accepted as the norm.
Analogy, then, in most cases acts as a conservative agent in language
by securing that its propagation and its continuity shall be subject to
some degree of regularity. On the other hand, this very tendency to
promote regularity and uniformity often makes itself felt by the
destruction of existing words or flections which deviate from a given
goal; and it is mainly when its destructive powers are manifest that its
effects are deserving of separate discussion.
So long as a speaker employs or a nation continues to use the ‘correct’
form,--gradually, regularly, and naturally developing it according to
the regular laws of phonetic change and growth to which it is subject
for the time being,--it is immaterial for the student of language
whether, in any particular case of the employment of a word, this
regularity is due to memory or to analogy. It is when analogy produces
forms phonetically irregular that its operation becomes of importance;
and it is from the study of such ‘novelties’ amongst its productions,
that we can alone derive full information about its nature. As long as
we find that the A.S. stánas remained stánas, or even that this form
was gradually changed into stones, we are not tempted to call in the
aid of Analogy, nor are we challenged to prove its operation. Similarly,
as long as the plural of eáge remains eágan, or eáge changes into
eye, and forms its plural eyen, no temptation presents itself to
inquire into Analogy or its operation. Even in this case, however, we
cannot help remarking that Chaucer might conceivably have formed his
plural eyen by analogy with other plurals in en. But it is when the
form eyen is replaced by eyes, that we naturally inquire whence
comes the s? And since no phonetic development can change n into
s, we know that analogy with other substantive plurals is and must be
the reason of the appearance of this otherwise inexplicable form. Thus
the French mesure could and did become the English measure; but the
French plaisir could not, according to the laws of phonetics, develop
into pleasure. We can only explain the latter form by assuming that it
is founded on the analogy of the older forms measure, picture,
etc.[23]
We ascribe to Analogy those cases of change in form of words, in
syntactical arrangement, or in any other phenomenon of language, such as
gender, etc., where the existing condition has been replaced by
something new modelled upon some pattern furnished by other more
numerous groups. Thus, for instance, we find that the Latin feminine
nouns in -tas, -tatis, have developed French derivatives in -té,
all of the feminine gender. Why, then, is été masculine, though
equally derived from a feminine Latin æstatem? The answer lies in the
fact that printemps, automne, and hiver, being all masculine, the
feeling set in that the ‘names of the seasons’ should be masculine: just
as names of trees are feminine in Latin, and this possibly under the
influence of arbor. Thus été followed the example of the others, and
was classed with them. The affinity in signification here caused the
difference in gender to be felt as an incongruity, and the less strong
came to be assimilated to the stronger and more universal type.
Similarly, such words as valeur seem to have become feminine after the
analogy of Latin abstracts in -ura, -tas, etc. In the former of
these particular instances we had to deal with a ‘MATTER-GROUP’ of four
cognate ideas, viz. ‘the seasons;’ in which group, as three of the terms
agreed in another accidental peculiarity, viz. that of gender, this
peculiarity was imposed likewise upon the fourth member, so as to
produce a more complete uniformity in every respect.
In other cases we find, perhaps indeed more frequently, MODAL groups
thus extending their domain. Thus the comparative forms, which nearly
all end in er, create the feeling that if a word expresses a
comparative degree it may be naturally expected to end in er; and
more from mo, lesser instead of less--nay, even worser for
worse is the result. In the case of more, its very form led to the
supposition that mo was a positive form.
Similarly, the existence of the plurals in s in Anglo-Saxon, aided no
doubt by the frequency of s plurals in French, has caused this way of
expressing the plural to embrace almost all English nouns; or, at all
events, to embrace their formation to such an extent that the older
methods (such as vowel modification, e.g. mouse, mice; foot,
feet; formations in en--ox, oxen, etc.) now appear as
exceptions, themselves needing explanation; and, again, as in the case
of more, when once the rule was formulated which laid down that if a
word expresses the plural it must end in s, the conclusion was drawn
that, if a word ending in s be used as a plural, this s is the
termination, and must be omitted in the singular. It thus happens that
to the analogy of fathers as against father, trees as against
tree, etc., we owe the sets Chinese used as a plural noun with its
newly coined singular Chinee; Portuguese with its singular
Portuguee; cherries (Fr. cérise), cherry; pease (Lat.
pisum), pea. Nay, it is not even always necessary that the s form
be used in a plural signification to cause the s to be ‘removed’ in
order to express the singular; a raedels was perfectly good Old
English, but as two riddles was right, the conclusion was natural that
one riddles was wrong. Two chaise would not give offence, but it
seemed natural to write and say one shay.
The modal group, again, consisting of such formations as despotism,
nepotism, patriotism, etc., created the feeling that tism was the
correct ending instead of ism, and so has manifested a tendency to
supplant it. Thus the correcter form egoism has made way for
egotism. Thus it is to the pianist, machinist, violinist, that
the tobacconist owes his n, to which he has no right; he ought,
properly speaking, to appear as tobaccoist.
The most widely reaching result of the operations of analogy is where
modal and matter groups, in their cross classifications, unite to
cancel irregularities created in the first instance by phonetic
development. Thus the Anglo-Saxon form scæd (neuter) exists side by
side with another form, sceadu (feminine). The Gothic form skadus
proves the latter to belong to the u declension. But even in
Anglo-Saxon this declension was but sparingly represented, most words
originally belonging to it being declined according to the far more
common scheme of words, like stán, stone; dóm, doom, etc.; others
varying in their declensions between the feminines whose stem ended in
wâ, or like those in â. In both these declensions the nominative
ended in u; an example of the wâ declension being--
    Nom. beadu, Gen. beadwe,
and of the â declension--
    Nom. giefu, Gen. giefe.
Our word sceadu long oscillated between these two paradigms, and we
consequently meet with a Gen. sing. sceade, as well as an Acc. plur.
sceadwa. This termination, where w was maintained, developed into
our present termination ow, seen in shadow; whilst the form shade
is, properly speaking, a nominative form. Analogy, however, depending
upon other nouns in which all cases in the singular had become identical
in form, caused the form shadow to be used in the nominative as well
as in other cases, and extended the use of shade over those cases
which were declined. Similarly, the two forms mead and meadow are
due, the one to a nominative, the other to the inflected cases of the
same word, the A.S. mǽd. In these cases both forms survived, and the
meanings became slightly differentiated; it more frequently happens that
one succumbs. Thus the A.S. Nom. plur. of the pronoun for the second
person gé developed into ye, the inflected case éow into you.
The latter has now almost completely ousted the once correct nominative
ye, which survives only in dialects or in elevated language, where, in
its turn, it frequently supplants the accusative and dative you.
The regular development of preterite and past participle in many verbs,
together with the dropping of the prefix ge, which in several Teutonic
languages has become specialised as a mark of that participle, caused
both these forms to converge into one. This has in its turn been the
cause why, in the case of many verbs, where regular phonetic development
kept preterite and participle asunder, one of these forms was made to
serve for both.
The A.S. verb berstan was, in its preterite, conjugated thus:--
  Indic. Bærst      Subj. burste
    ”    burste       ”   burste
    ”    bærst        ”   burste
    ”    burston      ”   bursten
    ”    burston      ”   bursten
    ”    burston      ”   bursten
and its past participle was borsten. Thus the u was present in four
of the six forms in the indicative, and in six subjunctive forms. The
first effect of the operation of Analogy was to abolish this useless and
cumbersome irregularity, and the u supplanted the æ, not long after
this æ had become a (barst). Then the process set in which we
explained above, and the past part. borst (en) was replaced by
burst.
It would be easy to multiply these instances ad infinitum. Enough has,
however, been said to explain the working of Analogy and to show how
wide its application is. The student who has mastered this sketch,
should proceed to study carefully the corresponding chapter in Paul’s
‘Principles of Language,’ and the pamphlet, cited above, by Professor
Wheeler, where many illustrations will be found taken from English and
many other languages. One of the main points which are clearly brought
out in the latter work is that the phenomena of folk-etymology show that
these groupings are effectual in modifying form only in so far as a
supposed likeness of contents or idea is associated (erroneously) with
the resemblance of form.
Before concluding our remarks, we must, however, add a few words on the
operation of Analogy where it works neither as a conservative nor as a
destructive agent, but simply as a CREATIVE one.
In the cases hitherto discussed, the forms called into being have
survived to the prejudice of older material which perished for lack of
vitality. In the struggle for existence it succumbed. A new form, in
order to survive, had necessarily to replace some unusual and
inconvenient older one, or it was a necessary condition that several
speakers, for some other reason, should concur in creating the same
novel form.[24] That ‘irregular’ forms should continue to exist in the
case of some of the commonest verbs, and in the pronouns, is explicable
by the fact that these words occur with sufficient frequency to gain
enough strength to resist innovation. The frequency of their occurrence
induces familiarity. Any new form which some innovating speaker might
create on the basis of some analogy is, in those words, too strongly
felt as a novelty; the speaker too frequently hears or reads the
‘correct’ form to permit the survival of the new candidate for general
usage. The novelty is a ‘mistake,’ remains a ‘mistake,’ and succumbs in
the struggle for existence. Frequency of use in the case of any
particular word may assist its phonetic development and increase its
impulse in that particular line, and its rate of speed on the road to
phonetic decay:--this is as yet, however, a point of dispute among
philologists, and a question which claims attention from all students of
language. But there can be no doubt that the more frequent the
occurrence of any particular form in ordinary speech, the more capacity
it must gain for resisting the levelling tendencies, the absorbing
influence of other more numerous but less common groups. It is, however,
not true that all the offspring of Analogy is thus exposed to the
struggle for existence. Where new ideas are to be expressed, Analogy
guides us in our choice of terms, and even where the idea is not
strictly new, but no term for it exists in the vocabulary or in the
memory of a community, or even in that of the majority of such
community, the new form will be adopted with little reluctance; nay,
often without being felt as a new creation at all. In this way the
language is always being enriched by new forms created on the analogy of
existing ones. Where many instances might be given, a few will
suffice.[25] The termination y of mighty, guilty, etc., was added
to the nouns earth, wealth, etc., to form wealthy,
earthy,--nay, even used to form such hybrids as savoury, spicy,
racy. After the model of kingdom, heathendom, etc., were formed
princedom, popedom, etc. The group winsome, blithesome, etc.,
gave birth to venturesome, meddlesome, etc.; and whilst sorrowful,
thankful, baleful, shameful, are found in A.S., no such antiquity
can be claimed for blissful, youthful, faithful, merciful,
respectful, etc.
It has been well remarked[26] that a perfect grammar would be one which
admitted no irregularities or exceptions; and if all the operations of
Analogy in forms and syntax could be thoroughly mastered and reduced to
rule, exceptions and irregularities would be far less common than they
are.
A SENTENCE must be looked upon as the first creation of language. The
SENTENCE is THE SYMBOL WHEREBY THE SPEAKER DENOTES THAT TWO OR MORE
CONCEPTIONS HAVE COMBINED IN HIS MIND; and is, at the same time, the
means of calling up the same combination in the mind of the hearer. Any
group of words which accomplishes this is a sentence, and consequently A
SENTENCE NEED NOT NECESSARILY CONTAIN A FINITE VERB, as is sometimes
alleged. In Latin, and in the Slavonic languages, the word answering to
is is very commonly suppressed; and in Latin epistolary language whole
sentences appear in which no copula occurs. Such combinations as Omnia
præclara rara; Suum cuique; are perfectly intelligible. In English we
often employ sentences like You here? I grateful to you! This to
me! Your very good health! Long life to you! Three cheers for
him! Why all this noise?--and, again, such proverbs as Oak, smoke;
Boys, noise; Ash, splash: and these are just as much sentences as
The man lives.
Language possesses the following means of expressing and specialising
such combinations of ideas:--
  (1) The simple juxtaposition of the words corresponding to the
  ideas; as, All nonsense! You coward! Away, you rogue!
  (2) The order of the words; as, There is John, as contrasted
  with John is there; John beats James, as against James beats
  John.
  (3) The emphasis laid upon these words; as in ‘Charles is not
  ill.’
  (4) The modulation of the voice; as when Charles is ill is
  stated as a mere assertion, and ‘Charles is ill?’ in which case
  the same words are turned into an interrogative sentence by the
  mere change of pitch during the utterance of the last word.
  (5) The time, which commonly corresponds with the emphasis and the
  pitch; the words in the previous sentences which are emphasised or
  spoken in a higher pitch respectively, will be found to occupy a
  longer time in utterance than the words composing the rest of the
  sentence.
  (6) Link-words, such as prepositions, conjunctions, and auxiliary
  verbs.
  (7) The modification of words by inflection, in which (a) the
  inflectional forms may, without other aid, indicate the special
  kind of combination which it is desired to express, as in patri
  librum dat; his books; father’s hat: or (b) the connection
  between the words may be denoted by formal agreement; as, anima
  candida, la bonne femme.
The method of combining ideas by means of link-words and inflections is
one which could only have set in after a certain period of historical
development, for inflections and link-words are themselves of
comparatively recent appearance in language; the other methods, on the
contrary, must have been at the disposal of speakers from the very first
development of language. It should, however, be noticed that 2-5
inclusive are not always consistently employed to represent simply the
natural ideas as they present themselves, but are capable of a
traditional development and, consequently, conventional application. For
instance, in the Scandinavian languages the method of intonation is a
purely artificial one;[27] and in Chinese, homonyms are distinguished by
lowering or raising the voice.
In Chinese the tones are five: a monosyllable may be uttered with (1) an
even high tone; with (2) a rising tone, as when we utter a word
interrogatively; with (3) a falling tone, as when we say, Go!--with
(4) an abrupt tone, as of demand; or with (5) an even low tone. These
are the tones of the Mandarin dialect, which is the language of the
cultivated classes; and, in their application, they are limited by
euphonic laws, so that they cannot all be used with all syllables.[28]
The idea, or the nature of the combination intended to be expressed by
the speaker, need not be completely represented by words in order to
render fully intelligible the thought present in the mind of the
speaker. Much less than a complete expression will often suffice.
If a sentence is the means of inducing a certain combination of at least
two ideas in a hearer’s mind, a complete sentence must necessarily
consist of at least two parts. We shall later discuss those sentences in
which only one of the two parts is expressed in words, and shall here
confine our attention to the complete sentence. Grammar teaches us that
a complete sentence consists of a subject and a predicate. Now, these
grammatical categories are undoubtedly based upon a psychological
distinction; but we shall soon see that it does not necessarily follow
that the grammatical and psychological subject, or the grammatical and
psychological predicate are always identical. The PSYCHOLOGICAL SUBJECT
expresses the conception which the speaker wishes to bring into the
mind of the hearer; the PSYCHOLOGICAL PREDICATE indicates that which
he wishes him to think about it. This, and no more than this, is
required to impart to any collection of words the nature of a sentence.
In grammar we commonly attach a much more restricted meaning to the
terms ‘subject,’ ‘predicate,’ and ‘sentence.’ For instance, when the
predicate is a noun, we demand that the normal sentence should express
the comprehension of the subject in a wider class; as, John is a boy:
or that it should express some quality of the subject; as, John is
good: or, lastly, that the subject be identical with the predicate; as,
John is King of England. But in reality we have, in many sentences,
noun-predicates which show us relations of quite another kind, expressed
by the mere collocation of subject and predicate, as in many proverbs
and proverbial expressions; e.g., One man, one vote; Much cry and
little wool; First come, first served; A word to the wise; Like
master, like man; Better aught than naught; Small pains, small
gains. This is the way in which children make themselves intelligible;
as, Papa hat, for Papa has a hat on: and this is the way in which
even adults endeavour to express their meaning to foreigners when the
latter have not mastered more of the language than perhaps a few nouns,
viz. by mentioning the objects which they wish to bring under the notice
of their companions, and trusting to the situation to enable these to
understand their meaning. We say, Window open, and we are understood
by the foreigner to mean that the window is open, or that we wish it
open, as the circumstances may show.
Originally, there was only one method of marking the difference between
subject and predicate, viz. stress of tone; as, e.g., in the instance
which we just gave, of ‘Window open.’ If these words are pronounced with
a great stress on ‘window,’ we at once perceive them to mean, The thing
which is (or which I wish to be) open is the window. If, on the other
hand, we exclaim, ‘Window OPEN,’ with stress on ‘open,’ we at once
convey the sense, The window is (or must be) open, not closed. This
shows that, in the case of such isolated instances, the psychological
predicate has the stronger accent, as being the more important part of
the sentence, and the part containing the new matter. Again, the place
held in the sentence by the subject and predicate respectively, may have
afforded another means of distinction between the two. Different views
have been held as to the respective precedence of subject and predicate
in the consciousness of the speaker. The true view seems to be that the
idea of the subject is the first to arise in the consciousness of the
speaker; but as soon as he begins to speak, the idea of the predicate,
on which he wishes to lay stress, may present itself with such force as
to gain priority of expression, the subject not being added till
afterwards. Take, for example, the opening of Keats’ Hyperion--
    ‘Deep in the shady sadness of a vale
    Far sunken from the healthy breath of morn,
    Far from the fiery noon, and eve’s one star,
    Sat grey-haired Saturn, quiet as a stone.’
In this case, the superior emphasis gained by the position of the
predicate in the first place causes the speaker to set it there, and is
indicative of the superior importance which he attaches to it.[29]
Similarly, the subject is sometimes expressed first by a pronoun, whose
relation only becomes clear to the listener when expressed more
definitely at a later period; as--
      ‘She is coming, my dove, my dear.’
    (Tennyson, Maud.)
‘She dwelt among the untrodden ways Beside the springs of Dove, A maid
whom there were none to praise And very few to love.’
  (Wordsworth, The Lost Love.)
‘She was a staid little woman, was Grace.’
  (Dickens, Battle of Life.)
This construction is extremely common in French; as, ‘Elle approche,
cette mort inexorable;’ ‘Mais ce qu’elle ne disait point, cette pauvre
bergère.’
The transposition, then, of subject and predicate may be considered an
anomaly; but it is an anomaly of frequent occurrence, and is based on
the importance which the predicate assumes in the mind of the speaker.
We have seen that single words may possess concrete and abstract
significations,[30] and it is the same with sentences. A sentence is
concrete when either the psychological subject or the psychological
predicate is concrete; as, This man is good. But as far as the mere
form goes, concrete and abstract sentences need not differ; for
instance, an expression like The horse is swift (which, when it does
not refer to any particular horse, is an ‘abstract’ sentence) is
identical in form with the expression The horse is worthless, which
obviously refers to some particular horse, and is therefore ‘concrete.’
It is the situation and circumstances alone which mark the different
nature of the sentences. There are, however, sentences which, with a
concrete subject, have a partially abstract meaning. If, for instance,
on hearing a lady sing, one remarks, She sings too slowly, the
sentence is entirely concrete; but the same words may be used to express
that the singer is in the habit of singing too slowly, in which case the
predicate becomes abstract. Such sentences may be called ‘concrete
abstract.’
It was stated that at least two members are necessary to make up a
sentence. It seems, at first sight, a contradiction to this statement
that we find sentences composed of merely a single word, or of a group
of words forming a unit. The fact is that, in this case, one member of
the sentence is assumed and finds no expression in language. Commonly
this member is the logical subject. This subject may, however, be
completed from what precedes, or is sufficiently clearly indicated by
the circumstances of the case; or, again, in conversation, it is often
necessary to take it from the words of the other speaker. The answer is
frequently a predicate alone; the subject may be contained in the
question, or the whole question may be the logical subject. If I say,
Who struck you? and the answer is John, the subject is, in this
case, contained in the question, and the answer is, ‘The striker is
John.’ If I say, Was it you? the whole question is the logical
subject, and the answer, Yes, No, Certainly, Surely, Of
course, etc., is the logical predicate, as if the reply had been, ‘My
being so is the case.’ Many other similar words may serve as the
predicate to a sentence spoken by another, such as Admittedly, All
right, Very possibly, Strange enough, No wonder, Nonsense,
Stuff, Balderdash, etc.
In other cases, the surrounding circumstances, or what is called ‘the
situation,’ forms the logical subject. If I say, ‘Welcome!’ and at the
same time stretch out my hand to a new arrival, this is equivalent to
saying, You are welcome, and welcome is the logical predicate. In
exclamations of sudden astonishment and alarm, such as Fire!
Thieves! Murder! Help! it is the situation which is the logical
subject. Challenges are instances of the same kind, e.g. Straight on or
not? Right or left? Back or forward? When the poet sings--
    ‘A wet sheet and a flowing sea,
       A wind that follows fast,
     And fills the white and rustling sail,
       And bends the gallant mast,’
the situation, again, is the logical subject.
It should be noticed that, in the case of sentences expressed by a
single member, the word which for the speaker is the psychological
predicate becomes for the hearer the subject. A man, seeing a house on
fire, cries ‘Fire!’ for him the situation is the subject, and the
idea of fire is the predicate. The man who hears ‘Fire!’ cried
before he himself sees it, conceives of fire as the subject, and of
the situation as the predicate. Sentences may, however, occur in which
both speaker and hearer apprehend what is uttered as the subject, and
the situation as the predicate. Supposing, for instance, that two
persons have agreed that the fire shall be extinguished before they go
out, and one of them, observing the chimney smoking, cries out, ‘The
fire!’ in this case the fire, the logical subject, is alone denoted, and
the predicate is gathered by the person addressed from the situation,
which is evident from the speaker’s gestures. If, again, two friends are
travelling, and one remarks that the other is without his umbrella, the
mere exclamation, ‘Your umbrella!’ suffices to make the latter complete
the predicate. The vocative, again, pronounced as such, and intended to
warn or entreat, suggests a psychological predicate which it lacks in
words. On the other hand, by the side of a verb in the second person
without subject pronoun, the vocative may be apprehended as the subject
to the verb. If I say, ‘Come!’ the vocative (the person addressed) may
be apprehended as the subject to this verb; if it be Charles, the
meaning is, Charles should come.
It is a question much disputed, and not yet decided, whether impersonal
verbs should be regarded as lacking a subject or not. If we regard the
grammatical form alone, we cannot doubt that sentences like It snows,
It freezes, It is getting late, have a subject. But there is no
reason for alleging that this subject (it) can be treated as a logical
subject; a logical subject must admit of a definite interpretation, and
it is difficult to give one in this case. Again, in the case of
impersonal verbs, like the Latin pluit, the Greek ὕει,, the
Sanscrit varśati, (it rains), and the Lithuanian sninga (it snows),
the formal subject may be found in the ‘personal’ termination, which
is supposed to be the remnant of a word signifying he, she, or it.
And it seems natural to recognise a formal subject in this case, but, at
the same time, to notice that this formal subject stands apart from the
psychological subject. It seems probable that an older stage of language
existed, in which the bare verbal stem was set down; just as in
Hungarian at the present day, where the third person of the present
singular has no suffix, the first and second terminating in -ok and
-s respectively. In Anglo-Saxon we find passive and other impersonal
verbs used absolutely, without any subject expressed or understood;
thus, þám ylcan dóme e þé démoð eów byð gedémed ( With the same
judgment that ye judge, to you (it) shall be judged); him hungrede (
N.H.G. es hungerte ihn).[31] The psychological subject is, then, as
little expressed in the sentence It is hot, as in the sentence Fire.
But although it is not expressed, it would be unsafe to assume its
non-existence, for here, as well as everywhere else, we have two ideas
conjoined, in the same way as when we exclaim, Fire! In this case
there is, on the one side, the perception of a concrete phenomenon; on
the other, the abstract idea of burning or of fire: and just as that
perception is brought by our exclamation under the general idea of
burning, so in the statement It rains, the perception of what is
going on is by our words ranged under the general notion of water
falling in drops from the sky. Our conclusion, therefore, is this:
sentences like Fire! as well as those like It rains, have both
psychological subject and predicate; but in the former case no subject
is expressed, whereas in the latter a formal subject is employed,
which, however, does but imperfectly, if indeed at all, correspond to
the psychological one. This holds good unless we conceive of the formal
subject, It, as standing for that which we see or that which is
happening now. In this case, the peculiar nature of the impersonal verbs
would be restricted to the difficulty, but not the impossibility, of
explaining their subject.
We have defined the sentence as the expression for the connection of two
ideas. Negative sentences may seem, at first sight, to contradict this,
since they denote a separation. But the ideas must have met in the
consciousness of the speaker before judgment can be pronounced whether
they agree or disagree. In fact, the negative sentence may be defined as
the statement that the attempt to establish a connection between the
ideas has failed. The negative sentence is, in any case, of later date
than the positive, and though, in all known languages, negation now
finds a special expression, it is possible to imagine that negative
sentences might be found in some primitive stage of language, wherein
the negative sense was indicated by the stress alone and the
accompanying gestures. Cf. such sentences as ‘I do this?’ or ‘Eine ego
ut adverser?’ (Ter., And., I. v. 28.)[32] At all events sentences of
assertion and sentences of demand border on each other very closely, and
can be expressed by the same forms of language. The different shades of
meaning attaching to the words can be recognised only by the different
tones conveying the feeling meant to be indicated.
Wishes and demands, again, touch each other very closely; and it is
natural to suppose that, in an early state of linguistic consciousness,
a wish would have been equivalent to a demand. A sentence like ‘Heads
up!’ expresses a demand or wish, but it might equally convey an
assertion. We can say perfectly well, ‘They entered, heads up,’ or
‘erect;’ and we hear quite commonly, Heads up! meaning, ‘Hold your
heads up!’ And indeed such sentences of demand, or imperative sentences,
would naturally be the first to present themselves to primitive mankind,
whose utterances, like those of children nowadays, would naturally take
the shape of requests that their immediate needs might be satisfied. We
employ many such sentences at the present day, such as Eyes right!
Attention! Hats off! This way! All aboard! Joking apart; An
eye for an eye; Peace to his ashes! A health to all good lasses!
Away with him! Out with him! Then, again, there are sentences
composed of a single linguistic member; such as Hush! Quick! Slow!
Forward! Up! Off! To work!
Two kinds of interrogatory sentences must be distinguished: (1) those
that put in question one only of the members of which they are
composed, and (2) such as contain nothing affirmative, but are purely
interrogatory in their nature. No satisfactory names have as yet been
given to these two classes, but a study of one or two examples will show
that the difference is real, and will tend to illustrate it. Such a
sentence as Who has done this? or Where did you get that? no doubt
asks a question as to the name of the doer of a certain deed, or the
place where a particular object was obtained, but, at the same time,
certainly assumes that the interrogator takes for granted that a certain
deed was done by some one, or a certain object obtained by the person
addressed. In fact, the form of the interrogation is to some extent
affirmative. No such affirmation, however, is present in such questions
as Can you speak French? Will you come? Have you money? etc.
Of these two classes of questions, the former are certainly of the more
recent origin, for they demand the employment of an interrogative
pronoun or adverb, with which the latter can dispense. It is noteworthy
that in I.E. languages these interrogative words are at the same time
indefinite; and it is hard to decide which of the two meanings should be
regarded as the original. On the one hand, it is easy to conceive how a
word bearing an interrogative meaning could assume an indefinite one. If
we are accustomed to employ the word who when we wish to know who a
person is, but are uncertain, we may easily proceed to apply this word
in a case where we are uncertain (or wish to appear so), though we do
not ask for information. A who-person has done this, is not and has
never been an English method of expressing, ‘Some one has done it.’[33]
But it is conceivable that, at some stage of the I.E. languages, our
linguistic ancestors may have adopted a similar mode of expression. On
the other hand, it is as easy to imagine that a word expressive of
uncertainty, or absence of knowledge or information, should be used to
indicate the desire for it. In fact, we actually do employ a method akin
to this when we use the indefinite any to show that we desire to know;
e.g., if, upon entering a dark room, we ask, Any one here? This, of
course, is not, and never has been, in English, equivalent to ‘Who is
here?’--but still it is quite conceivable that at some early linguistic
period this transition has actually been made. Could it be demonstrated
that it ever actually was made, the transition from the questions in our
second category, to those falling under our first, would be explained.
For suppose the question Is any (one) here? (an order of words to
which we now are bound, but which, as we shall see, was not always the
necessary order) to be put as Any (one) is here? the proximity of this
sentence to Who is here? is at once evident.
Questions with an interrogative pronoun stand nearer still to questions
with an indefinite pronoun where a negative answer is expected, as
appears when we set What can I answer? by the side of Can I answer
anything?--Who will do this? by the side of Will any one do
this?--Where is such a man? by the side of Is there such a man? The
question to which the simple answer ‘yes’ or ‘no’ is expected is in many
languages expressed by a special particle. Thus ne in Latin serves to
mark an interrogation, and the stress is laid upon the word to which the
interrogative particle is affixed. At present, the Teutonic and Romance
languages almost universally express interrogation by the order of the
words; but this inverted order by no means necessarily involves
interrogation, and in former times was very frequently employed in
affirmative clauses. Thus, for instance, in A.S.--
    ‘Ne hýrde ic cymlîcor ceól gegyrwan:’
    Not heard I comelier keel to have been prepared
     I never heard ... (Beowulf, 38).
    ‘Saegde se ðe cûðe’ (ibid., 90):
    Said he that knew  He ... said.
    ‘Waes seó hwíl micel’ (ibid., 146):
    Was the time great  The time was long.
Even now we have many interrogations in which the stress or tone alone
marks their nature; as, Any one there? All right? Ready? A glass
of beer, sir? (spoken by a waiter). We can thus conceive it possible
that, for a long time, sentences may have existed without any sign
except the tone to indicate their interrogative nature.
Simple interrogative sentences hold in some ways a middle position
between positive and negative sentences of assertion. They may, in fact,
be thrown into a positive or a negative form at choice; the positive
form naturally presenting itself as the simpler, while the function of
the negative form is to modify the question pure and simple. Such
modifications may, indeed, cause the interrogation to take something of
the character of the sentence of assertion. We may, for instance,
mention a fact and expect it to be confirmed by another. In this case,
we may employ a negative interrogatory sentence; as, Were you not
there? I thought I saw you! Or we may employ a positive interrogatory
form of sentence, showing by the tone of query alone the nature of the
sentence; as, You were there, I think? You are quite happy? We thus
see, by examples taken from both the positive and negative side, how
nearly the sentences of interrogation touch the sentences of assertion.
Another way in which sentences of interrogation and assertion approach
one another is in the expression of admiration or surprise. To express
such feelings we may employ either (1) the interrogative or (2) the
assertive form of sentence, marking the latter, however, by a tone
expressive of interrogation. Thus we may say, Is Francis dead? or
express the same idea by saying, Francis is really dead? emphasising
the word really and raising the voice at the last word. Thus, too, we
can ask the direct question, Are you here again? or employ the
assertive form, You are here again?[34]
Sentences expressive of surprise without a verb, may be classed either
with the interrogative form, or with the assertive form with the
interrogatory tone. They occupy a neutral ground between the two. Thus,
You my long lost brother? What, that to me? What, here already?
So soon?[35] And infinitival clauses are similarly used; as, I to
herd with savage races! etc. (Tennyson, Locksley Hall); Mene incepto
desistere victam? (Vergil, Æneid, I. 37). This use is very common in
French; cf. Moi vous abandonner! (Andrieux); Et dire qu’à moi seul je
vins à bout de toutes ces prévisions! (Daudet). We find, also,
expressions of surprise in which the psychological subject and predicate
are connected by ‘and:’ So young and so worn out? A maid and be so
martial? (Shakespeare, 1 Henry VI., II. i.).[36] The expression of
surprise is sometimes weakened into a mere conventional formula for
opening a conversation; as, Always in good spirits? Busy as always?
Busy yet?
The primitive form of expression without any finite verb is especially
common in the indignant repudiation of an assertion; as, I a liar?
‘She ask my pardon?’ How! not know the friend that served you? Ego
lanista? Io dir bugie?
What is vaguely known as the rhetorical class of questions arises from
a desire, on the part of the interrogator, to make the person addressed
reflect upon and admit the truth of information indirectly contained in
the interrogation. Such are the questions in some catechisms, and those
in the ‘Guide to Knowledge;’ e.g., Do not mulberry trees often bear two
crops of leaves in a year? Must not every substance be prepared before
it receives the colour? This use of the interrogation and interrogative
form is, of course, of much more recent date than the other common
usages.
The foregoing consideration of the sentence in its simplest form, as
consisting of simple subject and predicate only, will have prepared us
for the study of the development of all other syntactical relations from
this the only primitive one. For all other extensions of the
sentence--with the single exception of the copulative union of two
simple ones--arise from the repetition of the relation between subject
and predicate.[37] The copulative extension is now commonly indicated by
means of conjunctions or other particles; e.g., ‘John wrote and
Alfred was reading:’ but even now mere co-ordination is sufficient; as,
John wrote, Alfred read; He came, he saw, he conquered; One rises,
the other falls; Men die, books live; etc. It is therefore easy to
imagine that, at one time, this mere juxtaposition, which seems to us an
exceptional usage, may have been the regular one.
Among the other extensions, two main cases are to be distinguished, as
either (1) two equivalent members combine in the same clause with
another (i.e. two subjects with one predicate, or two predicates with
a single subject); or[38] (2) a combination (a) of subject and
predicate becomes, as such, the subject or predicate of some other
word or combination (b), which latter is then the predicate or
subject to (a) the former.
It is not easy to illustrate these extensions by instances drawn from
modern English: nay, it is impossible if we insist upon invariably
framing sentences which the present state of our language would regard
as admissible. But we must remember that we are now attempting to trace
the probable development of our syntactical relations, or rather of our
method of expressing the various syntactical relations, as it proceeded
during a very primitive stage of the history of language. At this period
the speakers were struggling to find intelligible utterance for their
thoughts, which were themselves but primitive, confused, childish. All
the examples which we have given heretofore should be regarded therefore
merely as illustrating processes common in very remote linguistic
periods, and not as instances of what is usual at the present period. We
have found it necessary on previous occasions to illustrate our
arguments by combining English words in a way which is not and has never
been English,--the advantage of such illustration being that it aided us
to understand, at least in a certain measure, the mode in which our
linguistic ancestors of ages long past thought. To this artifice we
shall find it necessary to revert somewhat largely, as the analytical
character of modern English, with its necessarily fixed order of words,
has effaced most traces of this primitive state of language.
We should have an instance of the first main case of extension mentioned
if, after saying, e.g., John reads, we remembered that Alfred too
was reading, and then merely added this second subject. We have shown
that we must not suppose that originally the order of the words was,
as is now invariably the case in modern English, (1) subject, (2) verb:
so that John read (without inflection, read being a mere name of the
action) was just as correct as read John, but not more so. If we
clearly grasp this, we can fully understand that such a combination as
John read Alfred (or, indeed, John, Alfred read) might once have
been intelligible for what we should now express by John and Alfred are
reading.
Similarly, a little linguistic imagination will suffice to enable us to
conceive of the production by those primitive language-makers of a
sentence like Sing(ing) John dance(ing) to express John sings and
dances. Such constructions of two equal parts in combination with a
third might be symbolised. Thus we might put s for subject, p for
predicate, then the symbolisation would run sps, ssp, psp, or
spp, etc., or a + b + a.[39]
In the first fictitious example, the two subjects stood BOTH IN
PRECISELY THE SAME RELATION to the predicate, and in the second the two
predicates stood in exactly the same relation to the subject. In such
cases, the facts may be described just as correctly and just as
completely by a sentence consisting of two parts only, viz., a compound
subject, consisting of the two joined by a copula, + the predicate (or
subject + compound predicate). Of these two modes of expression,
closely allied as they are, the one appears to us strange and, indeed,
impossible,--the other so familiar that we can hardly imagine a state of
language in which both alike may have been regular. On the other hand,
we have no difficulty in seeing how the two systems have become
confused.
All traces, therefore, of the construction which we have now lost are
interesting and worth studying. A sentence like Cicero’s Consules,
prætores, tribuni plebis, senatus, Italia cuncta a vobis deprecata est
( Consuls, prætors, tribunes of the plebs, the senate, all Italy
implored of you) is constructed much upon the model of the method now
obsolete. In this case, however, the construction seems to us less
unnatural, because the subject last named in the sentence, viz.,
Italia, may be considered to include all the others and to stand alone
in their stead: hence it is that we find the verb in the singular, and
hence the feminine gender of deprecata (implored). In another passage
Cicero says, Speusippus et Xenocrates et Polemo et Cantor nihil ab
Aristotele dissentit. This would be a perfect instance of ssp were it
not for the insertion of et, which (due, as it is, to confusion with
the compound subject in the sentence consisting of two parts only) would
lead us to expect that the verb would be placed in the plural. It is,
however, precisely this fact that the verb stands in the singular which
demonstrates that it belongs as predicate to each subject separately,
and not to the group indicated by the enumerated subjects jointly. In
M.H.G. we meet with such constructions, especially those where one
part--as the subject, for instance--is placed between the two others;
as, Dô spranc von dem gesidele her Hagene alsô sprach  ‘Then sprang
from the seat hither Hagen thus spoke.’ In A.S., too, we find
occasionally a somewhat similar construction, as in Beowulf, 90-92:
Saegde se ðe cúðe ... cwæð ðæt se Ælmihtiga  ‘Said he who knew ...
spoke that the Almighty.’ If we change the order, and add and, we
transform this sentence into one of two parts: SUBJECT, he who knew;
PREDICATE (compound), said and spoke. Even in modern language this
construction is not wholly without parallels. Cf. Another love
succeeds, another race (Pope, Essay on Man, iii., line 130); cf. also,
Dust thou art, to dust returnest (Longfellow).
Or, again, we find sentences where the two equal parts both follow or
both precede. He ðæs frófre gebád, wéox under wolcnum, weorðmyndum ðáh
(He received consolation [compensation], grew up under the clouds [ on
earth], increased in fame) (Beowulf, 7); He weepeth, wayleth, maketh
sory cheere (Chaucer, Canterbury Tales, 3618); Is Bushy, Green, and
the Earl of Wiltshire dead? (Shakespeare, Richard II., Act III., ii.,
141); Of ðære heortan cumað yfele geðancas, mannslyhtas, unriht-hæmedu,
forligru, stale, léase gewitnyssa, tællíce word (Matt. xv. 19).
But it is also quite conceivable that (REMEMBERING THE EXTENDED MEANING
WHICH, FOR THE PRIMITIVE STAGE OF LANGUAGE, WE MUST ATTACH TO THESE
TERMS) two subjects should come into the consciousness as related to the
same predicate, even though that RELATION is OF a very DIFFERENT NATURE
in the case of the one from that in the other. To illustrate this, let
us remember that the noun must once have been uninflected, or, at least,
no definite system of inflection had been evolved; the verb had a much
vaguer and less definite meaning than at present; the order of words had
not yet begun to be significant; that John strike, as well as strike
John, or words equivalent in meaning, could stand for John strikes,
or John has been striking; nay, even, if only accompanied by
appropriate gestures, for John was struck, or John is being struck.
Even at present, in the case of a verb like to smell, the relation
between the subject and predicate differs essentially when we say, I
smell the flower; or, The flower smells. An effort on the part of our
linguistic imagination is again needed, but the effort need not be very
difficult, in order to enable us to realise that in a sentence like
John smell flower, or John strike Alfred, BOTH nouns may once have
been felt as standing in the subject relation to the predicate; so that,
again, in the latter sentence, gestures or circumstances were needed in
order to make it clear who was the acting subject and who the suffering
subject, whereas, in the former sentence, no such confusion could arise.
If we take a sentence like ‘Give him a book,’ we feel both the person
and the thing as objects of the action; and observation of this fact
will enable us further to understand still more clearly that, at an
older period of language, two subjects may have stood in the same
sentence with the same predicate, though the relation between them and
that predicate was not the same. It may further aid us to understand
how, when once one of these subjects had developed into the grammatical
category of OBJECT, the possible relations of such objects were so
varied that the differentiation into various grammatical categories of
accusative, dative, etc., becomes intelligible and natural.
The object, when once developed, may and often does become, by the
nature of its relation to the predicate, a mere limitation or definition
of such predicate, instead of remaining a member of the sentence
equivalent in importance and weight with the subject, as it is, e.g.,
in such sentence as John strikes Alfred: whilst in a sentence like
John runs a mile, the object is a mere attribute to the predicate, and
the sentence can no longer be looked upon as tripartite, but must be
regarded as consisting of two parts, i.e. (1) the subject, and (2) the
predicate with its extension. These two cases, however, are not
separated by any clear line of demarcation.
And just as the predicate may receive such a defining word, so may the
subject and the object developed from it. These now commonly occur in
the shape of attributes, whether substantival or adjectival, and
genitives of substantives; as, The cattle are the farmer’s best; The
cattle are beautifully fat. This could not be expressed at all in
languages which have as yet developed no inflections: these could merely
employ the defining word in juxtaposition to the word defined; as, in
Chinese, T’su sin heu sin t’u ye, literally meaning ‘Origin Sin prince
Sin spring final part,’ i.e. ‘Originally the prince of Sin sprang
from Sin,’ i.e. ‘was born of a woman of the Kingdom of Sin.’ The fact
that the determinant attached to the subject is not a predicate can then
only be discovered by the presence of a third word which is detached
from the two words that together make up the subject by a greater stress
or, it may be, by a slight pause. Thus, if we say, liber pulcher, it
is impossible to say whether pulcher is a predicate or merely the
attribute to liber, unless we add some verb like est or habetur,
or unless the custom of the language leads us to apprehend pulcher,
from its position, as a predicate.
In truth the determinant, in this case ‘pulcher,’ is nothing but a
degraded predicate, uttered not so much for its own sake, i.e. for
the information it conveys, as in order to assign to this group of
subject and determinant a further predicate, which predicate then
conveys the real information; as, Liber pulcher nobis gaudio est: Hæc
res agetur nobis, vobis fabula (Plautus, Captivi, Prologue.)
We have stated that the determinant is merely a degenerate or degraded
predicate. The meaning of this statement may be most easily apprehended
from cases in which the finite verb is affected by this degeneration, so
that of the two predicates one might be logically replaced by a relative
sentence; as, There is a devil haunts thee (Henry IV., Pt. I., Act
II., iv.); I have a mind presages me (Merchant of Venice, I. i.); He
groneth as our bore lith in our stie (Chaucer, Canterbury Tales, 7411);
And was war of a pistel stood under a wal (Tale of Gamelyn); I’ll
have none shall touch what I shall eat (Massinger, City Madam, I. i.);
I can tell you news will comfort you (ibid., III. i.); The price is
high shall buy thy vengeance (Middleton, Spanish Gipsy, V. i. 443).
A similar construction was found in the older stages of the Romance
languages; cf. O.Ital. Non vi rimasse un sol non lacrimassi (‘There
remained none did not cry’); O.Fr. Or n’a baron ne li envoit son fil
(‘There is no baron does not send him his son’). Nor must we suppose
that this construction is one peculiar to the Indo-European languages,
and entirely inherited from an early stage in their development. Its use
in Teutonic languages becomes more general towards the end of the Middle
Ages than before that time. But even in Semitic languages like Arabic,
we meet with expressions such as ‘I passed by a man slept.’
In the above instances, we have seen that the finite verb could sink
into the position of a mere attributival determinant. In other words, in
such a sentence as ‘There is a devil haunts thee,’ the very words show
that the important word, in which the chief information lies, is
devil, while the verb haunts might almost as well be expressed by an
adjectival attributive, as ‘haunting.’ It is plain that if a verb could
thus easily lose its predicatival character, a predicate bearing no
distinguishing marks of its verbal character could, with even more
facility, be similarly degraded. The border-land between meus in
‘liber meus’ ( the book is mine) and liber meus amittitur is a very
narrow one.
It is very necessary to distinguish between the various functions of the
determinant--the differences in which, however, commonly remain
undenoted by us by any corresponding verbal difference, though they are,
logically speaking, of the greatest importance. The determinant may
leave the extent of the subject untouched; in other words, the epithet
may apply to all the objects or ideas which the substantive by itself,
or limited as it is by other circumstances, denotes: this is the case in
mortal man; the almighty God. On the other hand, it may serve to
restrict the meaning of the substantive; as when we say, old houses,
an old house, a (or the) son of the king, the journey to
Paris, Charles the Great. Similarly, if we say, the old house,
meaning to contrast it with the new one, it is obvious that we
individualise the meaning of house: while the expression would come
under the first head in a sentence like Lo, the place where I was born!
Humble as it is, I love the old house. In the latter class of
instances, the determinant must be expressed, because without it the
predicate is meaningless or untrue. If we say, A journey obliges us to
cross the channel, we ascribe by these words to all journeys what is
true of some only, e.g., of a journey to Paris. In the first category,
in considering the epithet, we may notice that it may already be known
as commonly attached to the word to which it is appended, as in This
red wine (the speaker holding it up) I prefer to many more expensive
ones; or it may tell us something new, as in the case of That poor man
has no children, where the sentence without poor would state the same
fact, the word poor conveying additional information. In this case it
approaches the nature of a true predicate, and we often employ a
relative sentence to express it: thus, instead of saying, Poor Charles
has had to emigrate; if we wished to emphasise the adjective, we should
say, Charles, who was poor, etc. Again, the determinant need stand
in no direct relation to the predicate, as in our above example, where
the fact that the man has no children is independent of his being poor;
but it may also stand to the predicate in the relation of cause and
effect, as in The cruel man would not listen to his victim’s prayers,
where the determinant ‘cruel’ is applied owing to the fact mentioned
in the predicate.
We have now seen that attributes are degenerated predicates. There are
sentences in which the determinant has, as yet, a somewhat greater
independence than is the case with the ordinary attributes, and which,
therefore, may be said to represent a transition stage. In a sentence
like He arrived safe and sound, the determinant safe and sound is
still predicate, in the wider sense of the term, to he, but
subordinate to the other predicate arrived, which alone in present
grammar would bear this name. Safe and sound are, IN COMPARISON WITH
arrived, a mere attribute to he, and nowadays such determinants are,
for the linguistic consciousness, what has been very correctly termed
PREDICATIVE ATTRIBUTES. These are distinguished from ordinary attributes
by a greater freedom in the place they may occupy in the sentence, and
thereby manifest their greater independence.
Predicative attributes are very frequently, but not always, adjectives:
we might, e.g., replace the one in our example by a prepositional
phrase like in safety and in good health. In Modern High German, where
the attributive adjective is declined in agreement with its noun, the
near affinity of this construction to the predicate shows itself in the
use of the uninflected form of the adjective as in the case of the
predicate. Thus we say, Er is gesund nach Paris gekommen: just as we
say, Er ist gesund.
When once all these various determinations have been developed from
original subjects or predicates, the sentence may become further
complicated, (1) by a combination of a determined and a determining
element becoming determined by a new element,--as in All good men
(i.e. good men + all); John’s eldest daughter (i.e. either eldest
daughter + John’s or John’s daughter + eldest, according to
circumstances); He falls easily into a passion,--to be understood, He
falls into a passion + easily: (2) this combination may itself serve
as a determinant,--as in Very good children (i.e. children + very
good); An all-sacrificing love (i.e. a love + all sacrificing);
He speaks very well (i.e. He speaks + very well); or (3) several
determining elements may be joined to one determinate,--as in Bad
gloomy weather; He walks well and fast: or (4) several determinate
elements may be joined to a single determinant, just as several subjects
may be joined to one predicate, or several predicates to a single
subject,--e.g., John’s hat and stick; He hits right and left.
These constructions are not always distinctly separable: for instance, a
phrase like big round hats may be understood as hats that are big and
that are also round (constr. No. 3,) or we may take it as round hats
that are big (constr. No. 1). Though the results of both constructions
would be the same, the ways in which these results are obtained are
logically distinct; just as the result of 3 × 5 is identical with 5 × 3,
though the genesis of that result varies according as we have groups of
five and take three of such groups, or as there are groups of three and
we put five of them together.
We have now considered the simple sentence and its extensions according
to the formula a + b + a (see p. 110) in all their bearings and
consequences. We said, however, that besides extensions on this plan,
there were others in which some combination of subject and predicate
became itself the predicate or subject to another member of a sentence.
This we may symbolise by (a + b) + a.[40]
We here enter on the ground covered by the complex sentence; but if the
reader has understood what has been already said, he will see that, if
we consider this division into simple and complex sentences from a
historical and psychological point of view, no clear line of demarcation
is to be found. It is indeed true that, as long as we agree that no set
of words shall be called a sentence unless it contains a finite verb, a
definite criterion exists. If, however, we fully realise that a
combination of noun and adjective, for instance, is as much subject and
predicate as noun and verb (cf. homo vivus with homo vivit), we
shall likewise feel that ‘The good man lives’ is a complex sentence, one
predicate of which has degenerated: it must accordingly be admitted to
differ in degree, but not in kind, from ‘The man who is good lives’,
where, again, the complexity is of precisely the same nature as in the
phrase round straw hats, if we were to say, for instance, ‘Round straw
hats are pretty, but round felt hats are ugly.’
Combinations on the plan (a + b) + a are common enough: I think
you are mistaken; The doctor saw I was not well; Remember you owe me
sixpence: in which cases the subject and predicate (a + b) serve as
object to another predicate.
There are, however, other constructions conceivable which would be more
strictly conformable to the scheme; such as I owe you sixpence is
true, or You are in danger grieves me; where we now use the so-called
conjunction that, which is originally a pronoun standing as a
repetition or a resumption of the subject--‘That I owe you sixpence is
true’ being originally ‘I owe you sixpence; that is true.’
To find such constructions as I owe, etc., is true in actual use, we
must go back to older stages of language, e.g., to Hans Sachs, the
German shoemaker--poet--dramatist (1494-1576), who framed such sentences
as A couple (man and wife) lived in peace for seventy years vexed the
devil, for A couple lived, etc., and this vexed, etc.;[41] The
afflicted woman stabbed herself tells Boccaccio. In the former of these
the sentence is subject, in the latter, object. A sentence (a + b)
serving as actual predicate we might illustrate by remembering that in
Latin Imperator felix may mean ‘The emperor is happy,’ and then
using Imperator qui capite est operto for the emperor’s answer in the
well-known anecdote--‘The emperor is he who has his hat on his head.’
Remembering this, and always carefully remembering the extended meaning
of the terms subject and predicate, we realise that in the common
construction like You are always grumbling, a bad habit, we have
really, in the so-called apposition a bad habit, a predicate.
In this way we can follow up the development of the sentence from its
simplest to its most complex form. After thus studying the hypotaxis in
all its bearings, we need only touch briefly on the subject of
parataxis.
Though, of course, it may occur that we have reason to make in immediate
succession two or more statements which are absolutely independent of
one another, this will be naturally rare; and, when it happens, we are
not likely to combine these statements into one compound clause. Even in
the nearest approach to such a case, where we enumerate different but
analogous or contrasting facts, the sentences are not absolutely
disconnected and independent: cf. She is crooked, he is lame. Here,
undoubtedly, more is expressed by means of the parataxis than the mere
enumeration of the two facts; an additional significance being given to
each by the very analogy between the two cases. Similarly in He is
laughing, she weeps, where the contrast is an additional fact expressed
by the coupling of the sentences. Still, the approach to independence is
here undoubtedly very close. We already depart a step further from mere
co-ordination in the case where--in grammatically absolutely identical
manner--two or more sentences are co-ordinated in a story; as, e.g., I
arrived at twelve o’clock; I went to the hotel; they told me there was
not a single room to be had; I went to another hotel, etc., where each
sentence to a certain extent expresses a cause or defines the time of
occurrence of the fact which is mentioned in the next. Now, though this
additional meaning is clearly there, it is a meaning which at the
moment of uttering each clause is not necessarily, nay not probably
clearly present in the speaker’s mind: we might more fully and perhaps
more correctly, though undoubtedly very clumsily, express the course of
thought by: I arrived ..., and when I had arrived, I went ..., but when
I had gone to the hotel, they told ..., and because they told ... I went
to another, etc.
We have, then, in our example a combination of independence with
interdependence which is the first step on the road towards
subordination of one member to the other.
Instead of the clumsy method of repetition which, if ever, is of course
but very seldom employed, we give partial expression to this mutual
relationship by demonstrative pronouns or verbs. (1) I arrived ...,
then I went ..., there they told ..., etc. (2) I met a boy; he told
me.... (3) He bought a house; that was old. (4) He told a lie; that
was a pity. A careful study of these examples,--in the third of which
the demonstrative pronoun refers (as in the second) to one part only of
the preceding sentence, whilst in the fourth it relates to the whole
statement made in the former part,--will show (a) the method of
development of demonstrative into relative pronoun; (b) that of
demonstrative pronoun into conjunction--It was a pity that he told a
lie; (c) the concomitant change from parataxis to hypotaxis--from He
bought a house, + that (house) was old, to He bought a house that
was old  ‘which was old.’
A peculiar kind of paratactical subordination occurs where an imperative
or interrogative clause loses its independence and becomes an expression
of condition; e.g., Go there yourself, (and or then) you will see
that I am right, or Do you want to do it? then make haste.
We have considered, in Chapter IV., the different ways in which words
change their meanings: and have remarked that change of meaning consists
in the widening or narrowing of the scope or application of each word.
We wish, in this chapter, to point out that these processes are not
confined to words, but that whole syntactical combinations are
constantly undergoing changes of meaning of a similar nature. It may be
well to give at the outset an instance illustrative of such difference.
Let us take the sentence, ‘The book reads like a translation.’ In this
sentence the meaning which we attach to the word book has developed
from that attached to A.S. bóc, a beech tree.[42] The word read has
been specialised in meaning from the more primitive signification ‘to
interpret.’ In the same way, translation meant originally nothing more
than a transference of any kind, but has been specially applied to a
transference of the ideas expressed by one language into those of
another. Such, then, are examples of changes of meaning which have
occurred in words.
But besides these changes, it is obvious that we have here a sentence in
which the relation between the subject and predicate differs
considerably from that which is the usual one. We do not in the
aforesaid sentence mean to say that the subject book performs the
action reads, but we wish to assert that the subject is of such a
nature as to admit of some person performing the action in question.
This usage of the subject and predicate, though, when employed
circumspectly, it need cause no obscurity, yet is an exceptional usage,
or, as we have elsewhere called it, an occasional one. Such a
construction might, however, easily spread, and become habitual or
usual. In that case we should have to admit that the meaning of the
general syntactical relation between subject and predicate connected by
a verb in the active voice had widened in extent, and contracted in
content. Instead of stating that the subject does the action, we
should now have to adapt the statement to the wider but more indefinite
relation--the subject either does or admits of the action. We shall
have occasion to return to these and similar phrases later on.
Now let us take the phrase ‘He reads himself into the mind of his
author.’ In this case we shall find that the meaning of reads is the
same as that which we usually attach to it; the peculiar meaning lies
not in the separate words, but in the phrase taken as a whole. The
particular, occasional use of the accusative himself, together with
the combination of the words, is what expresses the whole thought
implied; and thus we have here an instance of a specific construction in
which the force of the accusative connected with the word is different
from the force of the case in more common usage. Though the application
of the accusative in the way we have just mentioned must originally have
been an occasional one, yet the phrase, though it has indeed become
specific, has become so common, that we may in this combination call
its meaning usual. We have, then, in studying change of meaning in
syntactical relations, besides the classification of occasional and
usual, another distinction to draw; that between (a) a change of
meaning in a general relation, without reference to the individual terms
which happen to stand in that relation (such as subject and predicate,
verb and object, noun with accompanying genitive, preposition and its
régime), and (b) a change in meaning of a case, or other syntactical
relation, with regard to a specific word or expression, in connection
with which it has come to express a new shade of thought. These two
classifications are independent of each other, and cross one another. It
is further to be noticed that, just as it is impossible to draw a hard
and fast line of distinction between the occasional and usual in the
meaning of a word, so it is impossible to always clearly formulate when
the change in meaning of a syntactical relation is general or
special; nay, it would in many cases be difficult to decide whether a
change of meaning in a group of words is owing to a change of meaning in
the words, or in their syntactical relations. Yet it is necessary to
keep the distinction in view.
Instances of these syntactical changes are common in all languages. We
might take, as a simple instance, from the Latin, the syntactical change
which is brought about in the relationship of the transitive verb and
its accusative. Transitive verbs commonly take the accusative of the
direct object; as, Grecia capta ferum victorem cepit. But many words
not originally transitive become so when composed with a preposition;
as, accedere, præcellere, transgredi, just as to forego in
English is transitive, while to go is intransitive. This construction
was then felt as usual. But besides these we find a quantity of verbs
strictly intransitive employed with the accusative; as, ambulare
maria, (to walk the seas: Cicero, de Finibus, ii. 34); ludere Appium
(just as we say, to play the fool: Cicero, ad Quint. Fratr., ii. 15);
saltare Cyclopa (to dance the Cyclops dance: Horace, Sat. I. v.);
stupere donum, (Vergil); etc. It was felt that the relationship
between ambulare and maria, e.g., was closely enough related to that
of regere currum on the one hand, and to that of ambulare super
maria on the other, to enable analogy to become widely operative in
extending this use. The result was that some of the constructions passed
into regular usage; some stood out longer, and must always have appeared
as exceptional or occasional; as, sudare mella (Vergil, Eclogue iv.
30).
One of the most ordinary changes brought about by relations in syntax is
that due to the relationship of what is commonly called the governing
word and its case. The signification, for example, borne by an
accusative standing in the relation of object to a verb may cause the
verb to bear a meaning more special than its ordinary meaning. Thus, in
the case of such a phrase as I beat, it is clear that in to beat a
dog, to beat the enemy, to beat the air, different values are
attached to the meaning of the word ‘(to) beat,’ and the word thereby is
narrowed in its definition and correspondingly enriched in its contents.
It seems natural to examine a little more in detail the relationship
borne by the cases to the word which governs them: there seems no
objection to the use of the word governs, provided only that it be
understood with due limitations; that certain particular forms are
commonly devoted to the expression of certain ideas or relationships,
and that the idea be not entertained that there is anything in the
nature of the meanings of the words indissolubly connected with a
particular form.
To deal with the Cases first. It is impossible to set together the
different uses of the genitive, and to draw from these by induction any
certain proof of the functions which this case fulfilled in the
primitive Indo-European languages. For instance, the use of the genitive
when it depends on verbs seems to have nothing in common with that of
the same case when connected with substantives. In the former case, for
instance, in the Classical languages, we find merely a few isolated
instances of the genitive regularly governed by verbs, especially those
verbs which signify ruling over, remembering, lacking, etc. The
genitive with nouns, on the other hand, seems most probably to have been
used in Indo-European for the expression of any relation between two
substantives, as indeed it was in classical Greek, and, to a less
extent, in Latin; cf. such different usages as Cæsaris horti; docendi
gratia; reus Milonis; urbis instar; me Pompeii esse scio (Cicero,
Fam., ii. 13); Germanicus Ægyptum proficiscitur cognoscendæ
antiquitatis (Tacitus, Annals, xi. 59); hoc præmii; ut adhuc
locorum (Plautus, Captivi, 382). In modern English, on the contrary,
the function of the genitive in connection with substantives is greatly
restricted. Many usages possible in Anglo-Saxon are at the present day
obsolete; for instance, Criste is ALLRE kinge king (Orm., 3588),
MÁDMA mænigo (Beowulf, 41), ðaer wæs MÁDMA fela (ibid., 36), RINCA
manige (ibid., 729), he ÐAES WÆPNES onláh sélran sweord-frecan 
he lent the weapon to the brave hero (ibid., 1468-69), tó gebídanne
ÓÐRES YRFEWEARDES  to expect another heir (ibid., 2453,) he ʒef
Horse MÁDMES inoʒe (L.I. 163, Fiedler and Sachs, ii. p. 277).[43] The
genitive at the present day is confined to certain characteristically
special usages, and possesses several apparently independent
significations. It must, however, be noticed that the true inflectional
genitive in English is that which characterises the possessive case; as,
John’s hat. In other cases in Modern English, we have commonly dropped
the inflection, and are accustomed to render the genitival relation by a
periphrasis with the preposition of. Using the word genitive in this
sense, we may say that the typical usages of the genitive in modern
English are the possessive genitive (the man’s brother), the partitive
genitive (a cup of wine), and the genitive denoting that the governing
substantive is what it is in virtue of what depends upon it (the writer
of the work). This last division falls naturally into two sub-divisions
in the case of nouns of action: the subjective genitive (surly
Gloster’s governance--Shakespeare, 2 Henry VI., I. iii.) and the
objective genitive (the government of the country). These usages
have survived the various original methods of the application of the
genitive, and they must thus be counted amongst genuine grammatical
categories.
The relation of the accusative to its governing verb resembles the
relation of the genitive to its governing substantive. The most general
definition of the meaning of the accusative might be that it denotes any
and every kind of relation that a substantive can bear to a verb, except
that of a subject to its predicate. It is, however, true that, in
English, we are unable to employ it in every case to denote such
relation: nor, indeed, does this use seem to have been permissible in
the original Indo-European languages; though it is true that the
accusative was used more freely and commonly in old Greek and Latin, for
instance, than in later times: cf. such constructions as ἄπορα
πόριμος (Æsch., Prom. Vinctus); Quid tibi hanc rem tactio est?
(Plautus, Pœnulus, V. v. 29), humeros exsertus uterque (Statius,
Thebais, v. 439). Hence, in considering the different uses of the
accusative, we must at the very outset place those meanings side by side
which have gradually become independent.
The first distinction which we must remark in the use of the accusative
is that between the free accusative, or accusative which is
independent of the nature of the verb which it follows,--as, to buy a
hat,--and the attached accusative, which is connected with a few
verbs only by a close tie, and in each case with a restricted
signification,--as, to blow a gale, to row a race. The free
accusative is more freely used in English than in French or German; many
of the relations which in those languages are expressed by the genitive
and dative are in English expressed by the case under consideration.
One of the original usages of the free accusative was the expression
of an extension over space and time; and in this case, it is not
always found with verbs. We have in Latin, Cæsar tridui iter processit
(Cæsar, Bell. Gallic., i. 38); Unguem non oportet discedere (Cicero,
ad Att., xiii. 20): and, in English, such uses as To write of victories
next year (Butler, Hudibras, II., III., 173); My troublous dream this
night (Henry VI., Part II., Act. II., ii.); where the dative was usual
in Anglo-Saxon (see Koch, ii., p. 94; Mason, p. 147). As instances of
the attached accusative, we must especially consider the accusative of
such substantives as are ETYMOLOGICALLY CONNECTED with the verb; as, to
fight a hard fight; to see a strange sight; sangas ic singe (Ps.
xxvi. 7).[44] This ‘cognate accusative’ most probably furnishes the cue
to such constructions as Come and trip it as you go, where it seems
to replace some noun, as, e.g., tripping. Once established, this use
of it instead of a cognate noun in the accusative, would easily be
extended to cases like to foot it for to dance a dance, where the
use of the verb to foot is but an ‘occasional’ one, and apparently too
unusual to admit of the formation of the noun footing in the sense of
dance. We must, then, suppose that the word it stands for a dance,
i.e. for an accusative not cognate with the verb actually used, but with
another and synonymous verb. The use of the accusative of towns in
Latin, in answer to the question Whither?--as, Ire Romam,
Tarentum, etc., further illustrates the attached accusative with
which we may compare expressions in English, as to go west; flying
south, etc.
The usage, now common in English, whereby a predicative adjective is
connected with an intransitive verb seems to be of later origin. Cf. to
cry one’s eyes red; to wash one’s forehead cool; to eat one’s-self
full; to dance one’s-self tired; to shout one’s-self hoarse. In
these cases the predicatival force of the accusative must be regarded as
a widening of the signification. No doubt, however, special factors must
have aided to bring this construction into use: such as the survival of
the memory of the general signification of the accusative, as
representing the goal of the verbal action; and, again, the analogy of
such cases as to shoot a man dead; to buy a man free; to strike a
man dumb; to beat black and blue;--where the accusative serves to
define the verb, and indeed, almost enters into composition with it, as
it in fact actually does in many cases in German, like tot schlagen;
cf. the English dumb-foundered. There are a large number of colloquial
phrases which are similar,[45] such as to talk a person’s head off;
to worm one’s-self into another’s confidence; to read one’s-self
into an author; to laugh a man down, etc.
There is, next, the case of the accusative after compound verbs, where
the simple verbs are intransitive or govern a different kind of
accusative from that taken by the verb when compounded. Such are
circumdare and præcellere in Latin, and, in English, to forego,
to underrate, to withstand, to outlast; or, A.S. ofer-swimman,
forestandan, etc.; e.g., (hé) oferswam sioleða bigong--He swam
across the sea (Beowulf, 2368): Wið ord and wið ecge ingang
forstód--He withstood entrance against sword and spear (ibid.,
1550).[46] These are on the border line of ‘free’ and ‘attached’
accusatives.
There are certain verbs composed with certain prefixes which, in virtue
of their composition, receive a transitive force; as, belabour,
begrudge, bewitch, belie, befleck, etc., and which, in some
cases, receive in addition the power of adopting a different kind of
object, generally calling in the aid of metaphor to extend their
meaning; as, embody, encompass, enthral, overrule.
An ‘attached’ accusative, or one properly attached adverbially, in a
defining and qualifying sense,[47] to one definite individual verb, has,
as a rule, only one single meaning, limited by use. But sometimes we
find that in this case, too, several applications have set in; such may
have been in some cases original, and in others due to the fact that the
one ‘usual’ signification has extended by ‘occasional’ transgression.
Take such cases as to blow a gale, to blow a sail, to strike a
blow; to strike a man, to strike terror; to run a race, to run
a man down; to stone a man, to stone cherries; pacing the ground,
the morrice pacings; to keep a man from harm, to keep harm from a
man; to stick a man with a knife, to stick a stamp; and in Latin,
defendere aliquem ab ardore solis, defendere ardorem solis ab
aliquo; prohibere calamitatem a provincia, prohibere provinciam
calamitate; mutare equum mercede, mutare mercedem equo. So, too, in
Greek: ἀρκεῖν τινα ἀπὸ κινδύνου; ἀρκεῖν κίνδυνον ἀπό τινος.
Poetry has a strong tendency to aid such ‘occasional’ constructions to
become ‘usual:’ for it is a part of the technique of poetry to produce
strong impressions by using its material in a fresh and striking way:
thus we find in Latin, vina cadis onerare (Vergil, Æneid, i. 199: a
variation for cados vinis); liberare obsidionem (Livy, xxvi. 8),
instead of liberare urbem obsidione; vina coronant (Vergil, Æneid,
iii. 526) instead of pocula vinis coronant: δάκρυα τέγγειν  ‘to stain
tears,’ instead of ‘to stain with tears’ (Pindar): αἷμα δεύειν  ‘to
stain blood,’ instead of ‘to stain with blood’ (Sophocles). Thus, in
English, we have The Attic warbler pours her throat (Gray); to
languish a drop of blood a day (Shakespeare, Cymbeline, I. ii.) The
relation expressed by the accusative may in itself be more than a single
one; and thus the connection of a single verb with several accusatives
to express different ideas is quite natural.
It seems hardly true to state that the Indo-European prepositions
governed any particular case. The case which followed the preposition
was actually referred to the verb; the general meaning of the verb was
still felt and was merely specialised by the preposition; whence it
comes that the same preposition is followed by different cases, each
bearing its own special meaning. The Greek language offers good
examples of this, and seems to stand nearer the original state, as far
as usage goes. Take, for instance, a preposition like πάρα. Its general
meaning may be defined as ‘from:’ when followed by the genitive it
signifies ‘proceeding from;’ when followed by the accusative, ‘to,’
reference to the source not being overlooked: similarly with κατά, μετά,
etc. In English, more than in most European languages, the tendency has
been to multiply the use of prepositions, and to employ them
independently of any feeling for the case. The case has thus become more
and more independent of the preposition: the connection of the latter
with the case has become merely matter of custom; and the consciousness
of the original signification of the case has become fainter. With
regard to the Latin prepositions which govern one case only (like ex,
ab), or which govern more than one without affecting the sense (like
tenus), the employment of the case is merely traditional, and no value
can be attached to it. Between the absolute fixity of the one use and
the original freedom of the other use stands the employment of in,
sub, and super, sometimes with the ablative, sometimes with the
accusative, but with different meanings for the respective cases.
The changes that have appeared in Syntax in the case of prepositions are
very well exemplified in English, in which language their use has so
greatly spread, and plays such an important part. They were, in the
first place, prefixed to the verb, which they qualified adverbially,[48]
forming, in fact, a compound with it; as, ‘to overtake,’
‘overreach,’ ‘overlook.’ They were next detached from the verb, but
not prefixed to the noun; as, ‘to take over,’ ‘to reach over,’ ‘to
look over;’ and the difference in meaning between these three pairs
of phrases will show us how the preposition came to lose memory of the
proper signification of the case. In a later stage still, they appear
prefixed to nouns, and serve to particularise the relations of actions
to things--relations which, in the inflected state of language, were
expressed by the case endings of nouns; cf. Bigstandað me strange
genéatas (Cædmon)  ‘Stout vassals bystand me;’ He heom stód wið
(Layamon)  ‘He them stood against;’ or Again the false paiens the
Christens stode he by (P. Langtoft)  ‘Against the false pagans the
Christians he stood by;’ i.e. ‘He stood by the Christians.’
We sometimes find the partitive use of the genitive replaced by
apposition. The simplest and most natural example of this is where the
apposition is made up of several members which are collectively the
equivalent of the substantive to which they are appended; for instance,
‘They went, one to the right, the other to the left;’ ‘Postero die
terrestrem navalemque exercitum, non instructos modo, sed hos
decurrentes, classem in portu, simulacrum et ipsam edentem navalis pugnæ
ostendit’ (Livy, xxix. 22). ‘Duæ filiæ harum, altera occisa, altera
capta est’ (Cæsar, Bell. Gallic., i. 53); ‘Diversa cornua, dextrum ad
castra Sammitium, lævum ad urbem tendit’ (Livy, x. 41); ‘Capti ab
Iugurtha, pars in crucem acti, pars bestiis objecti sunt’ (Sall., Iug.).
But the same appositional construction appears when the whole apposition
represents only a part of the expression or phrase of which it is the
expansion; as, ‘Volsci maxima pars cæsi,’ (Livy): ‘Cetera multitudo
decimus quisque ad supplicium lecti’ (Livy); ‘Nostri ceciderunt tres’
(Cæsar); ‘My arrival, although an only son, unseen for four years, was
unable to discompose, etc.’ (Scott, Rob Roy, i.); ‘Tuum, hominis
simplicis, pectus vidimus’ (Cicero, Phil., ii. 43). This is also the
case where the subject is expressed only by the personal termination of
the verb; as, ‘Plerique meminimus’ (Livy); ‘Simoni adesse me quis
nuntiate’  ‘Tell Simo, one or the other of you!’ (Plautus). Similarly,
in the case of the designation of materials, we find an apposition
taking the place of the partitive genitive; thus we find, in Latin,
‘aliquid id genus’ for ‘something of that kind;’ ‘Scis me antea
orationes aut aliquid id genus solitum scribere’ (Cicero, Att., xiii.
12);’ Pascuntur omne genus objecto frumento maxime ordeo’ (Varro, de Re
Rustica, iii. 6);[49] ‘arma magnus numerus’ (Livy). Thus, ‘He gained the
sur-addition Leonatus’ (Shakespeare, Cymbeline, I. i.).
This more simple and primitive appositional construction is very common
in modern German; as, ein stück brot, ein glas wasser: in Middle
High German it was rarer; in modern Scotch it is common in such
instances as a wee bit body, a curran days (a number of days): it
was common in Anglo-Saxon; as, ‘scóp him Heort naman’ (Beowulf, 78);
Emme broðer ðe queene (Robert of Gloucester); The Duke of Burgoys,
Edmonde sonne (Wa., i. 87); David Kingdom (R. of G., i. 7.):[50] and
is found in Chaucer,--Gif us a busshel whet or malt or reye
(Canterbury Tales, 7328); half a quarter otes (ibid., 7545): and has
survived even in modern English, in such cases as The Tyrol passes
(Coleridge, Picc., i. 10); Through Solway sands, through Tarras moss
(Scott, Lay of Last Minstrel, i. 21). We must regard this method of
apposition as the most primitive in language; the two words in
apposition are simply placed side by side like two Chinese roots, and
must be looked upon as the simple stems without any inflection.
Even the subject of a verb may deviate from previous usage in the way
whereby it denotes a relation: cf. such phrases as The cistern is
running dry; The roof drips with water; The trees drop honey. Thus
we can say, The river is running over; The wood is resonant with
song; The window will not shut; The fire will not draw; The kettle
boils; This sample tastes bad; The hall thick swarming now with
complicated monsters (Milton): in Italian, Le vie correvano sangue
(Malespini): in Spanish, Corrieron sangue los rios: Sudare mella
(Vergil, Ecl. iv., 30); cf. also, the use of sapere, in Latin, in such
cases as cum sapimus patruos (Persius, Sat. i., 11); sentir, in
French, as Cela sent la guerre. In these cases we should expect the
subject and object to be inverted.
A similar departure from ordinary usage occurs in the case of what we
commonly speak of as ‘transferred’ epithets; i.e. adjectives referring
to merely indirect relations with the substantive to which they are
attached. Such are expressions like wicked ways; quiet hours; in
ambitious Latin (Carlyle, Past and Present, ii. 2); the blest abodes
(Pope, Essay on Man, iii. 259). Many of these linguistic licences have
become quite usual, and it is forgotten that the epithet attached to the
word does not strictly fit it: thus we speak quite commonly of the
happy event, a joyful surprise, happy hours, a learned treatise,
an intoxicated condition, in a foolish manner, a gay supper, a
bright prospect, etc.; and we can even say, He gives us an unhealthy
impression, a stingy gift, etc. The word secure in English, like
sûr in French, refers in the first instance to a person who need not
be anxious; in the second place, to a thing or person about whom no one
need be anxious. Thus we can say, I am safe in saying that he is safe.
As soon as these freer combinations are apprehended as an ordinary
epithet applied to its substantive, we may state that a change in
word-meaning has occurred.
Such licence occurs in the case of the participles and nouns in -ing
even more than in that of adjectives; thus we can say, in a dismantled
state (Dickens, Pickwick, 2); a smiling answer; this consummation of
drunken folly (Scott, Rob Roy, 12); a dazzling prospect; the selling
price; the dying day; a parting glass; writing materials;
sleeping compartment; dining room; singing lesson; falling
sickness; waking moments; the ravished hours (Parnell, Hesiod,
225). So, too, we speak of a talented man; cf. also the common French
expressions, thé dansant, café chantant. Tacitus has such uses as
Muciano volentia rescripsere (Hist., iii. 52) for volenti, etc.
We may probably compare with this use that of the so-called ‘misrelated
participle,’ a freely attached predicatival attribute, which is indeed
condemned as ungrammatical and careless, but which still occurs very
commonly in even the best authors. Cf. ‘When gone we all regarded each
other for some minutes with confusion’ (Goldsmith, Vicar of Wakefield,
13);
    ‘Thus repulsed, our final hope
     Is flat despair’
    (Milton, Paradise Lost, ii. 142);
‘Amazed at the alteration in his manner, every sentence that he
uttered increased her embarrassment’ (Miss Austin, Pride and Prejudice,
ch. xliii.).[51] We are, indeed, accustomed to say that in this case we
must supply a subject, and that the full expression would be ‘Amazed as
she was,’ in the last instance cited. But if we use such an expression
as ‘a pitying tear,’ we might maintain as well that it is necessary to
explain this as, ‘with a tear, shed in sign of his pity.’ The fact is,
that these loosely appended predicatival attributes answer to a need
felt in language, just as much as such words as regarding, during,
vu que, instar, supply a requirement in the prepositional category.
In the case of participial constructions, the participle expresses
formally the time-relation in which the condition or action denoted by
the participle stands to the finite verb. Thus, ‘Being frightened he
runs away’ expresses formally nothing more than the temporal relation
between the fright and what follows it. It is, however, possible to
understand different relations as implied by this participle; thus there
would, in this instance, be a connection of cause and effect. There are
many cases in which, were we to extend the participial construction into
a separate sentence, we should have to employ different conjunctions;
sometimes those denoting the reason,--as, ‘Since he was frightened he
ran away;’ sometimes we should have to employ such conjunctions as
denote an opposition,--as, ‘Notwithstanding that;’ thus, supposing that
the sentence in question ran, ‘Being frightened he did not run away,’
this would naturally be broken up into ‘Notwithstanding that he was
frightened, he did not run away.’ Sometimes, again, the participle
expresses a condition, as in such common cases as ‘Failing an heir,
the property passes to the crown.’
Still it is unnecessary to assert that the participle, as such, denotes
these different meanings--such as cause, condition, opposition, etc.
These relations are only accidental and occasional. When, however, we
have dependent sentences introduced by a temporal conjunction, like
quum, since, the accidental relation of this conjunction to the
governing sentence may come to attach itself and become permanent; in
this case, the conjunction will experience a change of syntactical
meaning. Take the case of since, formed by the adverbial genitive
suffix es, from sin  sithen (from sið, þ̱am, after that).
While, again, from meaning ‘the time that’ (a thing occurred,) has
come to denote ‘in spite of the fact that,’ in such phrases as ‘While
you pretend that you love me, you act as though you did not.’ In the
case of the modern German weil, the temporal signification has
completely disappeared; and in the same way prepositions, such as
through and by, which possess strictly speaking a local or temporal
meaning, pass into a causal meaning.
The instances given above may serve to show the way in which changes are
constantly occurring in syntax, and will aid in pointing out how
language is constantly aiming at supplying, in an economical fashion,
its needs as they successively present themselves.
We have discussed, in Chapter V., the force of analogy and its effect.
We have now to study a phenomenon of language which may be called
‘contamination,’ and which, though widely differing from analogy in the
most characteristic instances of both, is yet so closely allied to it as
to render it a difficult matter to draw any hard and fast line of
demarcation between the two.
We call the process ‘contamination’ when two synonymous forms or
constructions force themselves simultaneously, or at least in the very
closest succession, into our consciousness, so that one part of the one
replaces or, it may be, ousts a corresponding part of the other; the
result being that a new form arises in which some elements of the one
are confused with some elements of the other.
Thus, for instance, to take an imaginary case, a person seeing a book on
the table might wish to exclaim, ‘Take that thing away!’ Just, however,
as he is uttering the word thing, the consciousness that it is
properly called a book forces itself upon him, and he utters the word
thook. Of course such a form is a mistake, and a mistake so palpable
and, indeed, so absurd that the speaker will at once correct it. Every
one, however, who is in the habit of watching closely the utterances of
others, and indeed of himself, will be aware that such slips of the
tongue are extremely common; and it is clear that, though such
formations are, in the first instance, sudden and transitory, and
generally travel no further than the individual from whom they proceed,
yet they may, by repetition on the part of the same individual, or, it
may be, by imitation, conscious or unconscious, on the part of others,
end by becoming ‘usual.’
Contamination manifests itself not merely in the form of words, but also
in their syntactical combination. In the case of such a curious mixture
of two words as that which we took for our example, the very
grotesqueness of the result would probably bar the way to the spreading
of the word, though, as we shall see, traces are to be found of cases
hardly less grotesque than this. In syntactical combinations, however,
the results have far more frequently proved permanent; or, in any case,
the results do not commonly appear in such jarring contrast to received
usage as to challenge immediate correction, and, consequently, instances
can be more easily found in literature of syntactical than of verbal
contamination; some cases of such contamination pass into language and
become ‘usual;’ some are refused admission into normal language and are
set down as the peculiarities of the individual writer or speaker, or,
it may be, as his mistakes.
We saw that formation by analogy manifests itself as the alteration of
one form in compliance with a rule more or less consciously abstracted
from a number of examples drawn from a group to which that form does
not, strictly speaking, belong. Contamination is the alteration of one
form on the model of another synonymous form. The difficulty of
distinguishing between the two arises from this--that the contaminating
form or construction often derives additional force from being
associated with other members of its group, so that it may be doubtful
whether the rule or the one synonym gave the impetus to the new
formation. Nevertheless, we may lay it down that for analogy we must
demand a sufficient number of examples on which to base a rule; while
for contamination, a single form or construction may suffice. If we bear
in mind these main points of distinction, we shall commonly find no
difficulty in deciding to which of the two classes we should refer any
particular case.[52]
Among the results of contamination in single words, we must naturally
expect that those have the best chance of becoming permanent which least
deviate from the correct form; i.e. where the synonymous[53] forms
confused resembled each other, and the form due to their contamination
consequently bore sufficient resemblance to both to enable it to arise
repeatedly in the mouth of several speakers, and, when formed, to escape
observation. Thus the word milt (the soft roe of fishes) is a
substitute for milk (it appears in Swedish as mjölke); this was
probably due to contamination with milt (spleen), which is a different
word.[54] Again, the English combination ough is due to the
contamination of three distinct forms, viz., ugh (A.S. -uh), -ogh
(A.S. -áh), -oogh (A.S. -óh); whilst, at the same time, the loss
of the gh has affected the quality of the preceding vowel by the
principle of compensation. Thus the word through should have appeared
as thrugh, A.S. *ðruh (for ðurh); but it has been altered to
through, as if from A.S. *ðrúh, or else to *thurgh (A.S. ðurh),
which has been lengthened to thor(ou)gh.[55]
A.S. byrðen, ‘a load,’ became burthen, and is now burden, the
change being assisted by confusion with burden (Fr. bourdon), ‘the
refrain of a song.’[56] The word anecdotage is a wilful contamination
of anecdote + dotage, with a side glance at age (time of life),
though in dotage the suffix age has no connection with the noun of
same sound. Another-gaines, which was used by Sydney in his Arcadia
(1580) seems to have resulted from the confusion of anotherkins (of
another kind), which survives in the Whitby dialect, and anothergates
(of another gate, manner). On these instances, see Murray’s Dictionary,
s.v.
In this and similar instances, where the fact that the word occurs in
more than one meaning is due to confusion or misconception, it is often
difficult to say whether we have to deal with contamination proper, as
we defined it and illustrated it by the example on page 140. There
exist, however, in many languages words and forms which can be explained
in no other way. Such is the O.Fr. form oreste, a contamination
between orage and tempeste; and again, the O.Fr. triers seems to
be a contamination between tres (trans) and rier (retro).[57]
The confusion was rendered easier in the case of forms which may easily
pass into a grammatical paradigm. Thus, from the Italian o of sono
and the perfect termination in -ro ( runt), the o was
transferred to the other third person plural forms; whence such forms
as old Tuscan fecérono (modern furono) are contaminations between
the forms fecéro and amano.
The confusion of words belonging to the same etymological group is more
common: an instance may be seen in the Italian trápano (τρύπανον),
whose form seems to have been affected by traforare.[58] In Old French
the form doins is due to a contamination between dois and don. In
Provençal, the form sisclar seems a contamination between sibilare
and fistulare.[59] The English yawn represents a fusion of two
Anglo-Saxon forms, géonian and gánian.[60] The word minnow is a
contamination between M.E. menow and the O.Fr. menuise. Both of
these are ultimately from the same base, min (small),[61] but
underwent a different development. We might add as an instance the
jocular coinage squarson  Squire + Parson.
Our word ache offers a further curious illustration. There was in
Anglo-Saxon a verb ácan with past tense oc, past participle acen,
which gave us the verb ake (to hurt)--now erroneously spelt ache,
but still correctly pronounced. The noun in Anglo-Saxon was æce, in
which the k sound was palatalised into the sound of ch (in church),
whilst it remained k in the verb.[62] Accordingly we find still in
Shakespeare the distinction between the verb ake and the noun ache
(pronounced with tch as in batch, etc.). The confusion began about
A.D. 1700, when the verb began to replace the noun in pronunciation, and
occasionally the spelling ache was used for both noun and verb. The
prevalence of this spelling at present is mainly due, it appears, to a
mistaken derivation from the Gr. ἄχος;--the pronunciation to confusion,
or to contamination of the noun by the verb.
We reach the borderland of ‘Analogy,’ if we do not actually enter it, in
those cases where a word--under the influence of a modal group with a
synonymous function--assumes a suffix or prefix whose modal significance
was already expressed by the word in its simpler form. Thus it has been
considered a case of contamination of the comparative worse with the
modal groups of the other comparatives in er, when we find the double
comparative worser. Similarly, the Latin frequentative iactare
(iacio) was extended into iactitare under the influence of the modal
group composed of words like volitare, etc.: again, in English, the
form lesser has, as an adjective, almost entirely superseded the form
less; just as, in the colloquial language of the uneducated, we find
leastest by the side of least. There is, in Gothic, a superlative
aftuma, beside which we, however, find even there the double
superlative aftumists. This appears in Anglo-Saxon[63] as æftermest,
M.E. eftermeste, and in Modern English as aftermost; where the o
in the last syllable is due to the mistaken idea that the whole word was
a compound of most, though, as we have seen, it was really another
instance of a double suffix.
Contamination plays a far more important part in the area of syntax. It
is easy to cull from the pages of authors of repute instances of
anomalies which have no permanent influence on language: cf. ‘Amazed at
the alteration in his manner, every sentence that he uttered increased
her embarrassment’ (Miss Austen, Pride and Prejudice, ch. 43,[64]--a
confusion between ‘She was amazed at the alteration,’ etc., and ‘Amazed
as she was.’) There are many similar constructions in Shakespeare: cf.
‘Marry, that I think be young Petruchio’ (a confusion of ‘That I think
is’ and ‘I think that be’--Romeo and Juliet, I. v. 133); so, again,
‘Why do I trifle thus with his despair is done to cure it’ (a confusion
between ‘Why I trifle is to cure’ and ‘My trifling is done to
cure,’--Lear, IV. vi. 33).[65] The following are instances of
syntactical contamination from various quarters:--‘Showering him with
abuse and blows’ (Mary L. Booth, Translation of ‘Abdallah’ by Laboulaye,
p. 4,--from ‘Showering abuse and blows upon him’ and ‘Overwhelming him
with abuse and blows’).
    ‘Let us once again assail your ears....
     What we have two nights seen.’
    (Hamlet, I. i. 31),
(from ‘Let us once again tell you’ and ‘Let us assail your ears with
what we....’).
          ‘Jhone, Andrew, James, Peter, nor Paull
           Had few houses amang thame all’
    (Sir David Lyndsay, The Monarche, Bk. III. i. 4541-42),
(from ‘John, Andrew, etc. and Paul had few houses among them all’ and
‘Neither John, Andrew, etc. nor Paul had many houses’).
       ‘Thare ryches, rentis nor tressour
        That tyme, sall do thame small plesour’
    (Ibid., Bk. IV., 5504-5; see Skeat, ‘Specimens,’ iii.),
(from ‘Riches, rent, and treasure shall give small pleasure’ and
‘Riches, rent, nor treasure shall give much (or great or any)
pleasure’).
    ‘What with griefe and feare my wittes were reft’
            (Cf. Th. Sackville, Mirrour for Magistrates--Skeat, Specimens, iii., p. 287--stanza 18),
(from ‘What with grief and what with fear my wits’ and ‘With grief and
fear my wits, etc.’).
‘She was not one of those who fear to hurt her complexion’ (W.
Besant, The World went very well then, ch. 26). ‘What Castilla insists’
( What Castilla pretends + upon which Castilla insists),--Ibid. ‘If our
eyes be barred that happiness’ ( If our eyes be debarred from that ...
+ If (to) our eyes be denied that happiness),--Comus, 343. ‘On
attempting to extract the ball, the patient began to sink’ ( On
attempting ... ball, the doctors saw that the patient, etc., + when the
doctors attempted, ... the patient began, etc.),--Nichol and M’Cormick,
p. 56. ‘I must insist, sir, you’ll make yourself easy on that head’ (She
stoops to conquer, ii. 1,--a confusion between ‘I must insist upon your
making yourself easy,’ and ‘I hope, or demand, that you will make,
etc.’). ‘Was ever such a request to a man in his own house?’ (ibid.,--a
confusion between ‘Was ever such a request made to a man?’ and ‘Did ever
you hear such a request to a man?’). ‘A very troublesome fellow this, as
ever I met with’ (ibid.,--A very troublesome fellow this + As
troublesome a fellow as ever I met with). ‘There can be no doubt but
that this latest step ... has been the immediate result of ...’
(President’s Address, Mechanical Section, British Association,
Manchester;--a confusion between ‘There can be no doubt that’ and ‘It
cannot be but that’). ‘I prefer to go to London rather than to Paris,’
(a confusion between ‘I prefer going (to go) to London to going to
Paris,’ and ‘I would go to London rather than to Paris’).[66]
In many cases the contamination has become usual. We say in English, I
am friends with him, from ‘I am friendly with him’ and ‘We are
friends.’ The Danish popular idiom is similar: Han er gode venner med
dem (He is good friends with them). Compare too, the following
expressions: ‘a friend of mine;’ Fare thee well (a confusion between
‘Keep thee well’ and ‘Fare well’). On my behalf arose out of a
confusion of the A.S. on healfe, ‘on the side of,’ with a second
common phrase be healfe, ‘by the side of.’[67] In Greek we find
expressions like ὁ ἥμισυς τοῦ χρόνου, a confusion between ὁ ἥμισυς
χρόνος and τὸ ἥμισυ τοῦ χρόνου, etc.; in Spanish, muchas de virgines,
instead of muchas virgines or mucho de virgines: in Italian, la più
delle gente (Boccaccio). We have a similar instance of contamination in
the case of the Latin gerund: Pœnarum solvendi tempus (Lucretius),
from Pœnarum solvendarum and pœnas solvendi; nominandi istorum quam
edundi erit copia (Plautus, Captivi, IV. ii. 72). Cicero, again,
writes, Eorum partim in pompa partim in acie illustres esse voluerunt,
in which there is a confusion between eorum pars and ii partim.
Occasionally, a contamination results from the confusion of the active
and passive constructions; e.g., I care na by how few may see (Burns’s
song, ‘First when Maggie was my care’).
Sometimes an inaccuracy arises owing to the idea of a word which might
have been used displacing the word which actually was used by the
writer. Thus, for instance, the idea of the inhabitants displaces that
of the town or the country: cf. Θεμιστοκλῆς φεύγει ἐς 149 Κέρκυραν, ὢν
αὐτὼν εὐεργέτης (Thuc., 1. 136): Auditæ legationes quorum (Tacitus,
Annals, iii. 63). Cf. The revolt of the Netherlands (for the
Netherlanders) from Spain; ‘That faction (for the partisans) in
England who most powerfully opposed his pretensions’ (Mrs.
Macaulay.)[68] Here belongs the pleonastic use of pronouns, common in
English: cf. ‘I bemoan Lord Carlisle, for whom, although I have never
seen him, and he may never have heard of me, I have a sort of personal
liking for him’ (Miss Mitford, Letters and Life, 2nd Series, 1872,
vol. ii., p. 160).[69] In Latin and Greek we often find the relative
referring to a possessive pronoun, as if the personal pronoun had
preceded: cf. Laudare fortunas meas qui natum haberem (Terence, And.,
I. i. 69);[70] Τῆς ἐμῆς ἐπεισόδου, ὃν μήτ’ ὀκνεῖτε (‘The approach of me
whom neither fear ye’--Sophocles, Œd. Col., 730).
We have next to note confusions of the comparative and superlative
manner of expression, resulting in combinations like ‘Hi ceterorum
Britannorum fugacissimi’ (Tacitus, Agricola). Cf. ‘The climate of Pau
is perhaps the most genial and the best suited to invalids of any
other spot in France’ (Murray, Summer in Pyrenees, vol. i., p. 131).
‘Mr. Stanley was the only one of his predecessors who slaughtered the
natives of the region he passed through’ (London Examiner, Feb. 16,
1878, p. 204).[71]
A case of contamination sometimes results from the idea of the past time
rising into memory simultaneously with that of present time: cf., in
Latin, the use of iamdudum when joined to the imperative; as
iamdudum sumite pœnas (Vergil, Æneid, ii. 103),--a confusion between
iam sumite pœnas and sumite pœnas iamdudum meritas, i.e. between the
thoughts ‘pray take’ and ‘you should long ago have taken.’ Cf. Those
dispositions that of late transform you from what you rightly are
(Lear, I. iv. 242), and He is ready to cry all the day; cf., also,
such instances in Latin as Idem Atlas generat and Cratera antiquum
quem dat Sidonia Dido (Vergil, Æneid, ix. 266), where the effect of
the action once performed is intended to be brought out by the use of
the present.
We often find in English an interrogation with the infinitive, where we
should expect a finite verb; as, I do not know what to do; where we
should rather have expected I do not know what I should do. This
construction seems a confusion between cases in which the infinitive was
directly dependent on the verb without any interrogative, as, Scit
dicere (He can say); Il sait dire: and such constructions as What to
say? I do not know. Other instances are Shelley, like Byron, knew
early what it was to love (Medwin’s Memoirs of Byron, p. 9); How have
I then with whom to hold converse (Milton); then sought where to lie
hid (ibid.); hath not where to lay his head. This construction is
common in the Romance languages; as in French,--je ne sais quel parti
prendre; Italian,--non ho che dire; Spanish,--non tengo con quien
hablar; Latin,--rogatus ecquid haberet super ea re dicere (Aul.
Gellius, iii. 1).
Another form of syntactical contamination is when an interrogative
sentence is made dependent on a verb, and, at the same time, the subject
of this interrogative sentence is made the verb’s nominal object; as, I
know thee who thou art: You hear the learned Bellario what he writes
(Merchant of Venice, IV. i. 167): cf., also, Lear, I. i. 272. This usage
is common in Latin; as, Nosti Marcellum quam tardus sit (Cicero): in
Italian an instance occurs in tu’l saprai bene chi è (Boccaccio).
Similarly, we have cases in which the subject of an objective clause
introduced by that becomes a nominal object of the principal verb; as,
All saw him, that he was among the prophets: so, too, the object of
some subordinate clause may be also object of the main verb; e.g., They
demanded £400, which she knew not how to pay.
We find in English such phrases as ‘SUCH of the Moriscoes might remain
WHO demeaned themselves as Christians’ (Watson’s Life of Philip
III.)[72] We find in common use such phrases as such as I saw side by
side with the same which I saw, or that I saw. Bacon writes such
which must go before; and Shakespeare, Thou speakest to SUCH a man
THAT is no fleering tell-tale (Julius Cæsar, I. iii). So Fuller:
Oft-times SUCH WHO are built four stories high are observed to have
little in their cockloft. In Latin, we similarly find idem followed
by ut, as in eadem sunt iniustitia ut si in suam rem aliena
convertant. In English, again, we find sentences like--
    ‘But scarce were they hidden away, I declare,
    Than the giant came in with a curious air’
    (Tom Hood, Junr., Fairy Realm, p. 87);
It is said that nothing was so teasing to Lord Erskine THAN being
constantly addressed by his second title of Baron Clackmannan (Sir H.
Bulwer, Historical Characters, vol. ii., p. 186, Cobbett). We say ‘each
time when’ and ‘each time that’ (similarly, in French we find ‘au
temps où,’ and, at an earlier period, ‘au temps que’); ‘the rather
because,’ as well as ‘the rather that.’
In English we frequently find constructions like ‘Mac Ian, while
putting on his clothes, was shot through the head’ (Macaulay, History of
England, vii., p. 24); ‘I wrote an epitaph for my wife though still
living’ (Goldsmith, Vicar of Wakefield, ii.). In these cases, the
predicatival attribute has the same function as a dependent sentence
introduced by a conjunction; and consequently the circumstance described
is rendered more exact by the placing of certain conjunctions before the
simple adjective. So, in French, we say, Je le fis quoique obligé;
and, in Italian, benchè costretto. Similarly, in Latin, many
conjunctions are placed before the ablative absolute; cf. quamvis
iniqua pace, honeste tamen viverent (Cicero): etsi aliquo accepto
detrimento (Cæsar).
Conversely, the fact that dependent sentences and prepositional
determinants may have the same function, causes prepositions to be used
to introduce dependent sentences. This use is especially common in
English: cf. EXCEPT a man be born (St. John iii. 5); FOR I cannot
flatter thee in pride (Shakespeare, 2 Henry VI., I. iii); AFTER he had
begotten Seth (Genesis); sometimes this usage extends to cases where
the strict written language hesitates to accept it as usual; as,
‘without they were ordered’ (Marryat); ‘I hate him for he is a
Christian, but more for that--he lends’ (Merchant of Venice, I. iii.
43). Till and until are specially common in this use. Indeed, the
prepositional use of these words has almost died out in Modern English,
but is frequent in the literature of the Elizabethan age; cf.
Shakespeare, ‘From the first corse till he that died to-day’ (Hamlet,
I. ii. 105), where he should, strictly speaking, be him. Other
instances are quoted by Abbott, § 184. It must, however, be particularly
noticed that the constructions for that, after that, etc.,
may be used instead of for, after, when these words are used as
conjunctions. A preposition also stands before indirect questions: cf.
‘at the idea of how sorry she would be’ (Marryat): ‘the daily quarrels
about who shall squander most’ (Gay).
The result of contamination in syntax is often a pleonasm. Thus, in
Latin, we frequently meet with several particles expressive of
similarity; as, pariter hoc fit atque ut alia facta sunt (Plautus):
and, again, we find expressions like quasi si; nisi si.[73] Thus, in
English, we meet with the common but incorrect expression like as if.
We can connect a preposition either with a substantive or with a
governing verb: we can say, the place I am in, or, the place in which
I am. The two even occur in combination: cf. That fair FOR which
love groaned FOR (Shakespeare, Romeo and Juliet, I. v., chorus), and,
In what enormity is Marcus poor in...? (Coriolanus, II. i. 18). Nay,
we often find such expressions as of our general’s (Shakespeare,
Antony and Cleopatra, I. i. 1), instead of of our general or our
general’s; ‘If one may give that epithet to any opinion of a
father’s’ (Scott, Rob Roy, ch. ii.); ‘He is likewise a rival of mine,
that is my other self’s’ (Sheridan): cf. also the common pleonasm of
ours. Sometimes, to adverbs of place--themselves denoting the direction
whence--is added a preposition with a similar meaning; as, from
henceforth (Luke v. 10): cf. ‘I went from thence on to Edinburgh’
(Life of George Grote, ch. ii., p. 187).
Other instances of pleonasms arising from syntactical contamination are:
‘He saw that the reason why witchcraft was ridiculed was because it
was a phase of the miraculous, etc.’ (Lecky, History of Rationalism,
vol. i., p. 126); ‘The reason why Socrates was condemned to death was
on account of his unpopularity’ Times, February 27, 1871).[74]
Double comparatives and superlatives pleonastically resulting from
syntactical contamination are not unusual in English: cf. ‘Farmers find
it far more profitable to sell their milk wholesale rather than to
retail it’ (Fawcett, Pauperism, ch. vi., p. 237): ‘Still it was on the
whole more satisfactory to his feeling to take the directest means of
seeing Dorothea rather than to use any device,’ etc. (Middlemarch,
vol. iii., bk. vi., ch. lxii., p. 365). Thus we have in Shakespeare,
more kinder, more corrupter, and most unkindest (Julius Cæsar,
III. ii. 187); and thy most worst (Winter’s Tale, III. ii. 180). In
poetry, again, we find adjectives with a superlative sense compared; as,
perfectest, chiefest (Shakespeare), extremest (Milton), more
perfect (English Bible), lonelier (Longfellow).[75]
In Latin and Greek, we find the comparative where we should expect the
positive; as, ante alios immanior omnes (Vergil, Æneid, iv.);
αἱρετώτερον εἶναι τὸν καλὸν θάνατον ἀντὶ τοῦ αἰσχροῦ βίου (Xenophon). In
Scotch it is usual to say He is quite better again for He is quite
well again. We find the positive where we should expect the
comparative, as in St. Mark ix. 43; Καλόν σοι ἐστί ... ἤ (It is good for
thee than, etc.). We also find the superlative used where the
comparative would be regular: cf. Theocritus, xv. 139: Ἕκτωρ, Ἑκάβας ὁ
γεραίτατος εἴκατι παίδων.[76]
Pleonasm arising from contamination occurs most extensively in the case
of negations. Cf. ‘There was no character created by him into which
life and reality were not thrown with such vividness that the thing
written did not seem to his readers the thing actually done’
(Forster’s Life of Dickens, vol. ii., ch. ix., p. 181). In older stages
of English, as of German and French, this usage was very common. Cf.
Parceque la langue française cort parmi le monde est la plus délitable
à lire et à oir que nulle autre (Martin da Canale);[77] Wird das
hindern können, dass man sie nicht schlachtet? (Schiller). In Chaucer
and Shakespeare the use of the double negative is common: First he
denied you had in him no right (Comedy of Errors, IV. ii. 7). You may
deny that you were not the cause (Richard III., I. iii. 90).[78] With
this we may compare the redundant negative in Greek after verbs of
denying: οὐκ ἀπαρνοῦμαι τὸ μή; and, in Latin, non dubito quin: cf.
also the use of the double negative in Plautus, neque illud haud
objiciet mihi (Epid., V. i. 5). In these cases a negative appears with
an infinitive where the main verb itself contains a quasi-negatival
force: numerous instances may be found in Shakespeare; cf. Forbade the
boy he should not pass those grounds (Pas. Pilgrim, 9).
So we find a contamination of the two constructions: ‘not--and not’ and
‘neither--not’ in cases like Shakespeare’s ‘Be not proud, nor brag not
of thy might’ (Venus and Adonis, 113),  Be not ... and brag not +
neither be ... nor brag.
Compare also, ‘I cannot choose one nor refuse none’  I cannot choose
one and I can (or may) refuse none + I can neither choose one nor refuse
one.[79]
A pleonastic negation occurs in French and other languages after words
signifying ‘without:’ cf. Mätzner, Fr. Gr., § 165: Sans NUL égard
pour nos scrupules (Béranger); Elle ne voyait aucun être souffrant
sans que son visage N’exprimât la peine qu’elle en ressentait
(Bernardin de St. Pierre).[80] A curious pleonasm of the article occurs
in the following sentence: No stronger and stranger A figure is
described in the modern history of England (Justin McCarthy, History of
our own Times, vol. i., ch. ii., p. 31); a contamination between There
was not a stronger figure, and No stronger figure.
NOTE TO PAGE 148.
A very interesting and useful little book has been published by
Professor Nichol and M’Cormick on English Composition. It came too late
into our hands for us to make use of the many instructive and often
amusing examples it contains. We subjoin one (from p. 76).
‘The curses of Mr. A. B., like chickens, will come home to roost
against him’ (a contamination of ‘will be brought up against him,’ and
‘will come home to roost’).
Contaminations will account for many irregularities noted by the
authors.
We must not suppose that the conditions under which language was
originally created were different from those which we are able to trace
and to watch in the process of its historical development. We must not
suppose that mankind once possessed a special faculty for coining
language, and that this faculty has died out. Education and experience
must have developed our faculties no less for the creation of language
than for other purposes; and if we have ceased to create new materials
for language at the present day, the reason must be that we have no
further need to do so. The mass of linguistic material which we have
inherited is, in fact, so great that it is scarcely possible for us to
conceive a new idea for which, in the existing language, we could not
find some word or form either ready to our hand, or capable of being
made more or less suitable to express it, or at least able to supply
some derivative for the purpose. On the other hand, we must admit that
the process of new creation has never wholly ceased in language; and
even in English we find a certain quantity of words whose derivation is
unknown, and which seem to be unconnected with any Indo-European
language; e.g., dog, rabbit, ramble, etc.[81]
Again, we must not suppose that the history of language falls into two
parts--a period of roots, and another period when language was built
up of roots. At first, indeed, every idea to be expressed demanded the
creation of a new term; and even when the stock of existing words had
already become considerable, new thoughts must constantly have arisen
for which, as yet, there was no expression. Still, as the existing
vocabulary grew larger, the necessity for absolutely new words, not
connected with or derived from others already existing, grew less and
less; and it would therefore seem as if the need for such formations
would have gradually disappeared completely. But a little consideration
will suffice to show that, at all stages in the history of language,
there must have existed a certain necessity for new creations to express
new ideas; and we have a right to assume that in later times, as
civilisation grew more complex, the degree in which new creations were
necessary remained a considerable one.
The essence of original creation consists in the fact that a group of
sounds is connected with a group of ideas, without the intervening link
of any association already existing between a similar, related
sound-group, and a similar, related idea. When the Dutch chemist, Van
Helmont, conceived the novel idea of a category which should embrace all
such substances as air, oxygen, hydrogen, etc., he invented a new
term, ‘gas,’ which, unless the fancied connection with the word ‘geest’
(ghost) was indeed present in his mind, was a ‘new creation.’ If, on the
other hand, some one were now to invent some entirely new process of
treating gases, or of treating other substances with gases, and to
indicate such an operation by some such form as gasel, the word
gasel would no doubt be quite new, but we should not speak of it as an
‘original creation’ in the sense in which we use the words in this
chapter. It would be a new derivative.
Original creation is due, in the first instance, to an impulse which may
disappear and leave no permanent traces. It is necessary, in order that
a real language may arise from this process, that the sounds should have
operated upon the mind so that memory can reproduce them. It is further
necessary that other individuals should understand the sounds which thus
constitute a word, and should be able to reproduce them as well.
We find that the new is named in language after what is already known;
in fact, the old and the new stand related to each other as cause and
effect: in other words, the new is not produced without some kind of
connection with the old. This connection generally consists of some
pre-existing association between cognate words and cognate ideas. In the
case, then, of original creation, the essence of which we declared to be
the absence of that link, some other connection must exist; and this
will generally be found in the fact that the sounds and their
signification suggest each other. The sounds in that case will strike
the generality of hearers as appropriate to the meaning intended to be
conveyed, and the speaker will be conscious that those sounds are
peculiarly fitted to express the idea which is in his mind. As an
instance, we might take the barbarously constructed word
‘electrocution,’ now in use in America to denote the new method of
inflicting the death penalty in that country. The word electric is
understood; and so is the word execution: the barbarous new word is
the effect of our previous comprehension of these two words. Such
appropriateness will secure the repetition of the new creation by the
same speaker, and make probable the spontaneous creation of the same
term by various speakers living in the same mental and material
surroundings, both which effects are essential conditions for the common
acceptance of the new expression.
The most obvious class of words to illustrate this connection between
sound and meaning is what is known as ‘onomatopoietic;’ i.e. names
which were plainly coined in order to imitate sounds. The most common of
these are such as seem to be imitations of noises and movements. Such
are click, clack, clink, clang, creak, crack, ding,
twang, rattle, rustle, whistle, jingle, croak, crash,
gnash, clatter, chatter, twitter, fizz, whiz, whisk,
whiff, puff, rap, slap, snap, clash, dash, hum, buzz,
chirp, cheep, hiss, quack, hoot, whirr, snarl, low,
squeak, roar, titter, snigger, giggle, chuckle, whimper,
croon, babble, growl.[82] Those with the suffix le are used to
express iteration, and so to form frequentative verbs. These suffixes
are specially noticeable in words of imitative origin, such as the list
given in Skeat, English Etymology, p. 278. Some verbs denote at once a
noise and an explosion, like bang, puff; French, pan, pouf:
others a noise and motion, as fizz, whirr. These are words which
appear to date from comparatively modern English. There would be no
difficulty in gathering from Greek and Latin parallel instances, namely
of words imitative of sounds, which seem to be new creations and have no
apparent connection with any other Indo-European language, such as
gannire, χρεμετίζειν.
It would seem, therefore, that, as far as we can judge, the original
creations of language must have consisted in words expressive of emotion
on the one hand, and of sounds on the other.
Because, in such words as we have been considering, we recognise an
intimate affinity between the sound and the signification, it does not
however follow that all these words must necessarily have been in their
origin onomatopoietic. There are some cases in which the words have been
consciously modified so as to imitate the sound; as, hurtle, mash,
smash. Some may thus, perhaps, only seem to be ‘new creations,’
but it is very unlikely that this is generally the case. Nay, we may say
it is certain that most of such words as we have been considering are
‘new creations,’ and we are further strengthened in this conviction by
the fact that we frequently find words of similar meaning, and very
similar forms, which cannot, according to the laws of sound, be referred
to a single original; such are, e.g., crumple, rumple, crimp;
slop, slap, slip; squash, gash; grumble, rumble. These
seem to support the idea that they were formed as imitative of sound.
Strictly speaking, however, the only absolutely certain original
creations are interjections. True interjections, at least those usually
employed, are as truly learnt by tradition as any other elements of
language, and it is owing to their association that they come to express
emotion. But, as reflex-utterances to sudden emotions, they essentially
belong to the class of words we are now considering. Once existing, they
become conventional, and hence it is that we see different sounds
employed to express the same emotions in different languages. Thus we
have in English to express surprise, Dear me!--in Greek,
Παπαί--German, Aha! The Englishman says Hulló with rising, where the
Portuguese would say Holà, with falling intonation. To express pain,
we have Alas! Welladay! Woe’s me!--in German, Ach! Weh!
Au!--in French, Oh! Hélas! Ciel!--in Gaelic, Och! Och mo
chreach! To express joy, we have in English, Hurrah, Good!--in
German, Heida! Heisa! Juch! Juchheisa!--in Greek, Εὖγε!--in
Latin, Evax!--in French, the old expression, Oh gay! (Molière, Mis.,
Act. I., sc. iii.). Hence it is, too, that individuals employing the
same dialect employ different interjections to express the same emotion.
Thus, different individuals in the same linguistic community might
employ, to express disgust or disbelief, Pshaw! Fudge! Stuff!
Nonsense! etc.
Of the interjections cited above, it may be noticed that some, like
Pshaw! and Pooh! seem to be a primitive and simple expression of
feeling. Most interjections, however, seem to be made up of existing
words or groups of words; cf. farewell, welcome, hail, good,
welladay, bother, by ‘r Lady, bosh: and this is the case in the
most various languages. In many cases, their origin is quite concealed
by sound changes; as in hélas, which is really derived from the
natural sound hé, and las, ‘weary,’ and has come to be pronounced
‘hélas.’ Other instances are Welladay! Zounds! (i.e. God’s
wounds), Jiminy (i.e. Jesu Domine). Some of these have been
assimilated by popular etymology to words existing in the language; such
as Welladay! into which meaningless expression the old form wellaway
(A.S. wá lá wá  wo! lo! wo!) has been turned. Other instances are
harrow, in Chaucer, from N.F. haro; goodbye, from God be wi’ ye;
palsangguné  par le sang béni (Molière); cadedis, in Gascon, (
cap de Dieu  caput Dei). Some, again, have come to be used as
expressions of emotion, being in their origin foreign words whose
signification is partially or wholly forgotten; such are
Hosannah![83] (Save, we pray), Hallelujah![84] (Praise ye Jehovah).
There seems, however, to be a certain number of words which owed their
origin immediately to reflex movements, and which come to be employed
when we happen to again experience a similar sudden excitement. Such
words as these are bang, dash, hurrah, slap, crack, fizz,
boom. There are, probably, ‘interjections’ which, in single cases, are
natural productions, and in all cases lie near the field of natural
production; e.g., the sign of shuddering, or shivering with cold,
horror, fright (often written ugh!). It accompanies the shiver of the
body and is itself the result of an expulsion of air from the lungs
through the vocal passages where all the muscles are in a state of
sympathetic contraction. Aau! may also be, in single cases, a natural
production. Aautch is a sort of diminutive of it. Again, the sound
used in clearing the throat is a purely natural production. Coupled with
closure of the lips, forcing an exit by the nasal passages, it assumes
the form hm!--or hem! as commonly written. As commonly appearing
preparatory to speaking, it comes by association to have value in
attracting attention.
Many of these words are, at the same time, substantives or verbs as
well; and in this case it is often difficult to say whether the
interjectional use, on the one hand, or the nominal and verbal on the
other, is the original. For us, however, this is at present immaterial;
as long as in the one we have a real ‘original creation,’ the other
meaning may be a derived one. Duplication and triplication of sounds is
often employed, and often the vowel sounds belonging to the different
syllables are differentiated by ablaut. Thus chit-chat, ding-dong,
snip-snap (Shakespeare, Love’s Labour’s lost, V. i.), tittle-tattle,
kit-kat (in ‘the Kit-kat Club’), sing-song, see-saw, gew-gaw,
tick-tack; French, clic-clac, cric-crac, drelin-drelon,
cahu-caha (used to express the jolting of a vehicle). Words used as
substantives only, are formed in somewhat similar pairs as
hurly-burly, linsey-woolsey, hotch-potch; and so also are adverbs
such as helter-skelter, higgledy-piggledy. Old language material,
too, is often employed in the formation of such words as sing-song,
ding-dong, boohoo, rub-a-dub, zig-zag. We may compare also such
formations as ring-a-ching-a-chink-chink. There are other words due to
the same imitative impulse, which, however, are formed according to the
regular laws of language. Such are combinations of several words echoing
the sound, and differing only in their vowels: such as flicker and
flacker, crinkle-crankle, dinging and donging.
Nursery language. Most nursery language is imitative of natural
sounds, and reduplication plays an important part in the words in this;
cf. bow-wow, puff-puff, gee-gee, etc.[85] This language is not
invented by children, but is received by them like any other, and
welcomed by those who have to teach infants, as facilitating the efforts
of the teacher. The relation of the sound to the meaning which often
still exists therein, facilitates the acceptance of the word by the
child to be taught. Indeed, the words of the language of culture are
sometimes actually compounded with words of nursery language, as in the
case of moo-cow, baa-sheep, coo-dove. It must further be remarked
that, when a language has developed into a state of culture and finds it
necessary to create new words, these words accommodate themselves to the
forms already existing in the language, and undergo processes of
formation similar to those which have operated on the words already
existing in the language. They appear with the derivation and flection
syllables common in the language at the time when they were created. For
instance, supposing cackle and chuckle to be words of this sort,
cack, and chuck or chugh are the only parts due to original
creation;--the termination le seems a regular iterative form, and the
words have come to be classified with others of the same formation, and
treated in the same way. Similar instances are αἰάζω (αἰαί) οἰμώζω
(οἰμοι), etc.
Roots. We are led to see, then, from such forms as cackle, that what
we regard as a root need not necessarily ever have existed as a bare
root, as an independent element; but immediately upon its appearance, it
is naturally provided with one or more suffixes or prefixes in
accordance with the exigencies of the language. Thus, for instance, in
the Middle ages a belfry was called clangorium. And further, the
function of new creations is determined by the analogy of other words
existing in the language; and thus the new words, as soon as they appear
in the language, conform to the laws of language, and an element appears
in the words which does not depend upon original creation. So φεῦ forms
a verb in Æschylus, Agamemnon: τί ταῦτ’ ἔφευξας (1194; see also line
960); cf. ächzen in N.H.G., and the use of such words as crack,
crackle, crackling.
In what has been said hitherto, we have mainly considered the form in
which language appears; but neither in this nor in its syntax must we
suppose that the first creations with which language began were operated
upon by any such influences as analogy. We must suppose them to have
been entire conceptions, condensed sentences, as when we cry out Fire!
Thieves! They are really, it will be seen, predicates; and an
impression unspoken but felt by the speaker forms their subject. The
impressions made by noises and sounds would be those that would
naturally strike first upon man’s consciousness; and to express these he
creates the first sounds of language. The oldest words, therefore, seem
to have been imperfectly expressed conceptions partaking of an
interjectional character.
Again, it must be remembered that the new creations of primitive man
must have been made with no thought of communication. Until language was
created, those who uttered the first sounds must have been ignorant that
they could thereby indicate anything to their neighbours. The sounds
which they uttered were simply the reflection of their own feelings, or
when they came by observation to associate with their neighbours’
feelings. But as soon as other individuals heard these reflex sounds,
and at the same time had the same feelings, the sounds and feelings were
in some way connected, and must have passed into the consciousness of
the community as in some measure connected as cause and effect. We must
also suppose that gesture language developed side by side with the
language of sounds: and, indeed, it is not until language has reached a
high degree of development that it can dispense with gesture language as
an auxiliary. The Southern nations, which use most interjections,
employ also most gesticulations. The Portuguese language, for instance,
is exceedingly rich in interjections, and moreover these interjections
are in common use, to an extent which at first strikes a foreigner as
excessive and almost unpleasant, but which he soon learns to appreciate.
Conversation in Portuguese often derives a peculiar charm and
picturesqueness from the frequency with which one of the speakers
expresses his meaning, quite clearly, with some interjection (e.g.
ora) and some gesticulation.[86]
We must further remember that, as soon as a speaker has recognised the
fact that he can, by the means of language, communicate his thoughts,
there is nothing to prevent the sounds uttered consciously as the
vehicles of communication from attaching themselves to those which are
merely involuntary expressions of feelings. Whether the group of sounds
so produced shall disappear or survive must depend on its suitability to
fill a need, and on many chance circumstances.
It should also be noticed that we must suppose the original human being,
who had never as yet spoken, to have been absolutely unable to reutter
at his will any form of speech which he had chanced to produce. He would
slowly and gradually, after repeatedly hearing the sound, acquire the
capacity for reproducing it. The children of our own day hear a certain
number of definite and limited sounds repeated by persons in whom
identical motory sensations have developed.
We are driven, therefore, to assume that language must have begun with a
confused utterance of the most varying and uncertain articulations, such
as we never find combined in any real language. We may thus gather that
the consistency in motory sensation necessary to a language must have
been very slow in developing.
The result, then, at which we arrive is that no motory sensation can
attain to a definite form and consistency except for such sounds as are
favoured by their natural conditions. The sounds most open to be acted
on by such conditions are those immediately resulting from the attempt
to express natural feelings; in the endeavour to express these, nature,
which prompted the feelings, must have prompted some uniformity of
utterance. The traditional language must at its outset have contented
itself with comparatively few sound signs, even though a large quantity
of different sounds were, on different occasions, uttered by the
different individuals.
The process of utterance must have been long and tedious before anything
worthy to be called a language could come into existence. A language
cannot be produced until individuals belonging to the same linguistic
community have begun to store up in memory the product of their original
creations. When they can draw upon their memory at will, and can count
upon reproducing the same sound-groups to represent the same ideas, and
can likewise count upon these sound-groups being understood in the same
sense, then, and not till then, can we speak of language in any true
sense.
If this be the true test of the existence of a language, it is no doubt
true that we must admit that many beasts possess language. Their calls
of warning or of enticement are clearly traditional, and are learnt from
those around them. They utter the same cries to express the same
emotions, and this consistently. But the language of beasts suffices
only for the expression of a simple and definite feeling. The language
of man consists in the grouping of several words so as to form a
sentence. Man thus develops the power of advancing beyond simple
intuition, and of pronouncing judgment on what is not before him.
The process of forming our modal and material groupings of ideas, and of
the terms which we use to express those ideas, is essentially a
subjective one, and is, as such, productive of results which would seem
at first sight to be incapable of scientific generalisation. Within the
limits, however, of any given linguistic community, the elements of
which such groups can be formed are identical, and--with all possible
divergence of width and depth of intellectual development in the members
of that community--there is a certain uniformity in the manner in which
each individual member employs that part of the common stock of ideas
and terms of which he is master. Hence it inevitably follows that the
groups which are formed will, IF THE AVERAGE be taken, prove about
equal, and we are thus justified in abstracting from the individual, and
in generalising concerning such grouping at any given period, in exactly
the same manner as we do in speaking of the language of a community or
of the pronunciation of a given word by a community. In this process, we
may for our purpose neglect individual peculiarities or deviations from
that abstract and always somewhat arbitrary norm.
And just as the language of any two periods of time shows that
differences arise which permeate the whole, so, if we compare the
groupings of which we can prove the existence in former times by the
influence they exerted on the preservation or destruction of different
forms in the language with those we can observe at present in our own
linguistic consciousness, or with those which were prevalent at any
other period of time, we notice (1) that what formerly was naturally
connected by every member of the linguistic community is no longer felt
to belong together, and (2) that what once formed part of different and
disconnected groups has been joined together.
It is the former of these two events which we have to discuss in this
chapter:[87] its chief causes are change in sound and change in, or
development of, signification. The effects of the latter in isolating
more or less completely some word or some particular use or combination
of any word from the group with which, owing to parallelism in meaning,
it was once connected, we have already illustrated in Chapter IV.
Sound-change has or may have similar effects, and even the influence of
analogy, which, as we have seen in Chapter V., is mainly effectual in
restoring or maintaining the union between the members of a group,
sometimes contributes to the opposite effect when any one particular
member happens, from whatever cause it may be, to be excluded from its
operation.
Thus, for instance, our present word day is found in Anglo-Saxon as--
  Nom. and Acc. Sing. dæg     Plur. dagas
  Gen.            ”   dæges     ”   daga
  Dat.            ”   dæge      ”   dagum,
where æ was pronounced as the a in man, hat, etc., and a as
a in father: æ is therefore a ‘front-vowel,’ like the a in
fate, ee in feet, etc., while a of dagas was a ‘back-vowel,’
as are o or u.
The phonetic development of final or medial g differs according to the
vowel which preceded it. If this was a front-vowel the g became y
(vowel),[88] if it was a back-vowel the g became w. Thus, e.g.,
A.S. hnægan, E. neigh; A.S. wegan, E. weigh; A.S. hálig, E.
holy: but A.S. búgan, E. (to) bow; A.S. boga, E. bow; A.S.
ágan, E. to own. Accordingly dæg, etc., in the singular became
day, whilst in the plural we find in M.E. dawes, etc. As soon,
however, as analogy had established the ‘regular’ s plural to the
sing. day, plur. days, the verb (to) dawn, A.S., dagian was
thereby isolated completely, and no speaker who is not more or less a
student of the history of English, connects the verb with the noun.
Another instance maybe found in the word forlorn.
To understand the history of this word we must know what is meant by
Verner’s law.
Among the first illustrations of the regular correspondence of the
several consonants in Latin and in the Teutonic languages are such pairs
as mater, mother; pater, father; frater, brother; tres,
three; tu, thou: in all of which a th is found in English where
the Latin shows a t. This and other similar regular interchanges were
generalised by Grimm and formulated by him as a law, part of which
stated that if the same word was found in Latin, Greek, and Sanscrit, as
well as in Teutonic, a k, t, p, in the first three languages
appeared as h, th, f in Low German, of which family English is a
representative.
All our sets of examples seem to illustrate and confirm this law. If,
however, we trace the English words back to older forms, we see that
this absolute regularity is disturbed. In Middle-English almost
invariably, and in Anglo-Saxon invariably, we find fader, moder,
brother, A.S. fæder, módor, bróðor, in perfect agreement with
O.S. fadar, môdar, brothar, and Goth. fadar, brothar (cf. Mod.
Ger. vater, mutter, but bruder). It was Karl Verner who explained
this irregularity, and proved that it was connected with the place of
the accent in the Teutonic languages, not as we find it now, but as it
can be proved to have existed in those languages, where it corresponded
generally with the Greek accents, or more closely still with the accent
in Vedic Sanscrit. There we find that in the corresponding forms
pitar, mâtar, and bhratar, the accent or stress lay on the FIRST
syllable in bhratar, but on the LAST in pitar and mâtar. Verner
proved by numerous examples that only where an ACCENTED vowel preceded
the p, t, k, Teutonic showed the corresponding f, th, h; but
that, on the other hand, where the preceding vowel was UNACCENTED,
instead of f we found b, and d instead of th, g instead of
h. And also, instead of s, which was elsewhere found both in Latin
or Sanscrit as well as in Teutonic, z was found, which z further
changed into r in Anglo-Saxon.
Thus--to give one more instance--the suffix ian, used to form
causatives in Teutonic, once bore the accent, which afterwards was
placed on the root-syllable. Accordingly, the causative of the verb
rís-an (to rise) was once rás-ian,[89] which, with z, and, later
on, r, instead of s, changed into rǽr-an, Mod. Eng to rear.
The so-called Grammatical change in Anglo-Saxon (and other Teutonic
languages) now becomes clear:
  The verb                   in past sing.      plur.    p. part.
  céosan (to choose) has      caés         curon   coren
  sniðan (to cut; Scotch,
            sned) has         snáð         snidon  sniden
  téon (to drag) has          téah         tugon   togen
and all this series of regular sound-change depends upon the fact that
in the past plural and in the past participle the accent fell ORIGINALLY
on the termination. Similarly, (for)
léosan,--léas,--luron,--loren, from which last form we have our
word forlorn, meaning, therefore, ‘completely lost.’ Already, however,
in Anglo-Saxon, in very many verbs all traces of this grammatical change
have disappeared, and the history of the strong conjugation in
Middle-English shows the gradual supersession of the consonants in the
past plural and past participle by those found in the present and past
singular. Hence those forms in which these older consonants remained
were more and more isolated from the groups with which they are
etymologically connected; and as little as in popular consciousness to
rear is grouped with to rise, so little is the adjective forlorn
thought of as a member of the group to lose, lost, etc.
We have had already more than one occasion to point out that not only
words, but also syntactical combinations and phrases can and do form
matter groups. Nay, even the various meanings of a syntactical relation
are thus combined.
Such a relation, for instance, is that expressed by the genitive. Though
we employ--and formerly employed more generally than now--this case with
various meanings, all these meanings are more or less (rather less)
consciously felt as one, or at least are closely related--and they
continue to be so felt, i.e. the grouping remains a close one--as long
as these various usages remain general and what we may call living.
When, however, any one of these usages becomes obsolete, and the
relation indicated finds another form of expression in some other
syntactical arrangement, some few examples of the older mode of
expression, strengthened as they are by, e.g., very frequent
employment, remain, but cease to be felt as instances of that relation.
Thus, though the meaning of the genitives in This is my father’s
house, and in God’s goodness is essentially different--the one
expressing an ownership of one person with regard to a material external
object, the other the relation between a being and an immaterial
inherent quality,--both are felt as one kind of relation; nay, the
superficial thinker has some difficulty in fully realising that they
express really TWO meanings. More easily felt is the difference between
the Latin and French ‘genitivus subjectivus’ and ‘genitivus objectivus:’
amor patriæ, l’amour de la patrie (the love for our fatherland, ob.
gen.), and amor matris, l’amour de la mère (the love which our
mother feels for us, sub. gen.). Yet, once more, even this difference
is not always realised by every one who uses both constructions. Another
use of the genitive once was to form adverbs. As long as any genitive
could be thus employed, we may be sure that the ordinary speaker will
have grouped, when thus using it, not only the particular form with
other cases of the same noun, etc., but also the genitives, as such,
with other genitives. When, however, other modes of forming the adverbs
prevailed, the old genitival adverbs which remained were no longer felt
as genitives, and became isolated and no longer productive as examples
for other formations. A remnant of this genitive survives in needs,
and perhaps in Shakespeare’s Come a little nearer this ways (Merry
Wives, II. ii.; ed. Collier);[90] in straightways, and certainly in
M.E. his thankes, here unthankes (libenter, ingratis), or A.S.
heora ágnes ðances (eorum voluntate). It further survives in adverbs
derived from adjectives: else (from an adj. pron. el) unawares,
inwards, upwards, etc.
Similarly the preposition of, which early began to serve as a
substitute for the genitive, has been employed in some adverbial and
other expressions. This usage, however, if it ever was really “alive,”
is now completely dead. We find I must of force (Shakespeare, 1 Henry
IV., II. ii.) and my custom always of the afternoon (Hamlet, I. v.);
and still can say of an evening; all of a sudden; but not, e.g., of
a moment. Nor should we now imitate Shakespeare’s not be seen to wink
of all the day (Love’s Labour’s Lost, I. i. 43); Did you not of late
days hear (Henry VIII., II. i. 147), though we still have of late,
of old.
Many other prepositions offer in their constructions illustrations of
isolation. Thus, e.g., the combination of any preposition with a noun
without an article was exceedingly common in the older language, and we
still possess a numerous collection of such combinations in almost daily
use. Thus we find indeed, in fact, in truth, in reality, in
jest, etc., a construction which perhaps may yet be considered a living
one when the noun is an abstraction. Adverbs of place, however, such as
in bed, in church, are no longer formed at will: no one would say
in house, in room.
So, again, we have at home, at sea, at hand, but not at
house,[91] at water, at foot. We can throw something overboard,
but not over wall or over river. We can stand on shore, on land,
on foot, on board, but do not speak of standing on bank, on
ship. We can sit at table, not at sideboard. One may come to
grief, to ruin, but cannot omit his or her in come to ...
death. We can say by night, by day, by this day week, but not by
spring, by winter. Lastly: we travel by land, by sea, by water,
by rail; we send a packet by parcel delivery; we communicate by
letter, or by word of mouth, but should not ask for information by
saying, Let me know by line (instead of by a line), will you?
In the isolation of the genitives, which we discussed above, and in all
similar syntactical isolations, it would perhaps be correct to
distinguish two phases of development, or--as they are not necessarily
chronologically separated--two sides of the same process. For while in
course of time, as we have seen, one of the SYNTACTICAL MEANINGS OF THE
GENITIVE CASE became isolated from the other relationships expressed by
that same case, we must, on the other hand, also remember that this
involved an isolation of certain formal or modal groups (in this case,
of --s forms) from their historical nominatives, which in most cases in
its turn caused, or was accompanied by, a more or less clearly marked
separation in development of meanings. When the genitive case was no
longer generally employed to form adverbs from nouns and adjectives,
words like needs, straightways, else, upwards, were no longer
felt as genitives, and we now feel that the adverb needs is not in our
consciousness grouped with the noun need, in the same way as, for
instance, the nom. plur. needs with the sing. need; nay, if we
carefully examine the meaning of the adverb, we find that its material
meaning no longer completely coincides with that of the noun.
The various meanings of the NOUN need are urgent want, poverty,
position of difficulty, distress, necessity, compulsion; the
ADVERB answers only to the last two: He must needs go could not be
used for He must go on account of urgent want, or as a consequence of
poverty or distress, but only for He must go of necessity,
indispensably, inevitably.
Such formal isolation, then, is almost always at the same time a
material one. Thus, we may say that the noun tilth is not so
intimately connected with the group I till, tilling, well tilled,
etc., as, e.g., writing is connected with to write, etc.; and this
because the suffix -ing is a living and productive one, i.e. one
which still forms verbal nouns at our will, whenever the need arises,
and from whatever verb; whilst the suffix th is no longer so used,
being at the present day comparatively rare in English (health,
wealth, strength, length, breath, width), and, indeed, more
often occurring as an adjectival than as a verbal suffix.
The closest groups are naturally always those consisting of the
different inflected forms of the same noun or verb, and the ties
connecting the members of such a group are undoubtedly stronger than
those between words of different functions, etymologically connected,
but whose mode of formation or derivation is not so vividly realised by
the ordinary speaker. This is so true, that the same form, when used as
present participle, must be said to be more closely connected with the
other parts of the verb than when used as an adjective; and this can be
proved by the fact that often such an adjective has undergone changes in
meaning in which the verb and even the present participle, as such, has
not participated. Thus, e.g., the present part. living, in ‘he is
living,’ whether we mean this for ‘he is alive’ or ‘he is dwelling in
...’ has the same usage as the verb he lives, and no more. This is,
however, no longer true of the ADJECTIVE living, in a phrase like ‘I
give you living water.’ To realise this we need but replace the
adjective by a relative clause, ‘which lives,’ when we at once feel that
we extend the use of the verb in an unusual way. Thus, again, the NOUN
writing, in ‘These are the writings of ...’ for ‘These are his
(perhaps printed) works,’ has an application which we could not give to
the verb to write.
This illustrates the fact that a development in meaning of a derivative
is not necessarily shared by or transferred to the primary word, whilst
any extension of usage of such parent-word is likely to spread to its
derivatives. The same is of course true of simple and compound words.
Hence the process of isolation of derivative from primary, or compound
from simple, generally originates in change of meaning in the former of
each of these groups. Thus, the noun undertaker is isolated from the
verb to undertake in consequence of a restriction of its meaning to
the person who makes it his profession to undertake the management,
etc., of funerals. So, again, though the noun keeper  guardian,
watchman, protector, is applied to a certain gold ring, we could hardly
say that such a ring keeps the others. A beggar, originally ‘one who
begs,’ is now one who ‘habitually begs and obtains his living by doing
so,’ while, if ever we do apply the term in the wider and older sense,
we often indicate--in writing at least--the closer connection with the
verb to beg by using the termination er, the characteristic
termination of the nomen agentis begger. There is, in German, a very
interesting word which illustrates this fact to an extent which it
would be difficult to parallel completely in English. By the side of the
verb reiten, ‘to ride,’ a noun ritter exists, of which the original
meaning was merely a rider. Like our word ‘beggar,’ this ritter was
specialised in meaning, and applied to one who rides habitually and as a
profession, i.e. a warrior who fights on horseback. When these
warriors began to form a privileged body (an order to which many were
admitted who never, at least professionally, rode) the noun attained a
meaning to which no verb could correspond.
Again, some adverbs, especially such as emphasise our expressions, have
developed in meaning often much further than the primary adjective has
followed them. Thus very, as adverb a mere emphatic word, has, as
adjective, retained much more fully its original meaning of true: cf.
this is very true, very false, with, a very giant. It is the same
with the adverb awfully, now indeed common, but noted by Charles Lamb
as a Scotticism, and with the adjective sore, and the adverb sorely.
It is, however, not always the derivative which, in its isolation,
assumes the modified signification. The primitive may change, and the
derivative remain stationary. Thus the English shop, as a place for
retail trade, has been displaced in America by store, while shop
comes to have the value of work-shop, machine-shop, etc. Yet the
derivative shopping, a much-used word in America, retains a
reminiscence of the older value of shop.
To return for a moment to the example which we gave from German: the
verb reiten (pronounced with a vowel sound closely resembling that of
i in to ride) and the noun ritter (i nearly like i in rid,
or, more correctly, like ee of need, but shortened), show a
gradation of vowel-sound, of the same nature and origin as that in such
pairs as write, wrote; sing, sang; give, gave. This change
in vowel-sound without doubt co-operated in effecting the isolation, and
so facilitated the change in meaning in the one form; a change in which
the other did not participate. Thus, speaking generally, phonetic
development, by creating numerous meaningless distinctions, loosens the
modal and material groups, and serves to forward isolation of meaning.
Thus, again, the special meaning which we now attach to the verb to
rear would have been more likely to transfer itself to the primary verb
to rise, or--vice versâ--the meaning of the primary to rise would
have almost certainly prevented the special development of to rear, if
the etymological connection had not been obscured by the phonetic
development which we formulate as Verner’s law, i.e. if the grouping
had not been loosened.
It is, moreover, clear that if, from whatever cause, an interchange of
certain sounds becomes less frequent in a language, those words which do
preserve that interchange become ipso facto more strongly separated.
Thus, e.g., the umlaut, i.e. the change of u (sounded as oo) to
ü (sounded as u in French, the Devonshire u; more like English
ee than like English u), or of a (a as in father) to ä
(sound much like a in fate, but without the ee sound which in
English follows it), etc., is in German so common that in no case is its
presence or absence alone sufficient to effect the isolation of any form
from its related group. In English, this interchange has almost
completely disappeared, and the few traces of it which we preserve in
the plural formation (foot, feet; tooth, teeth; mouse, mice;
man, men, etc.) are only preserved as so-called ‘irregularities,’
and no longer form a model or pattern for other formations. Hence in
English, where, besides umlaut, we have difference in function (e.g.
adjective and noun), the isolation has often been complete. Thus, no
ordinary speaker groups the adjective foul with the noun filth; and
the connection, though still felt, between long and length, broad
and breadth, is undoubtedly less clearly felt than between, e.g.,
long and longer, or broad and to broaden, high and height:
similarly, the difference in vowel between weal and wealth, (to)
heal and health, has facilitated isolation of these forms.
If phonetic development were the only agent in the history of language,
we see that, shortly, an infinite variety of forms, absolutely
unconnected, or at best but loosely connected, would be the result. But
here, as always, we have action and counteraction.[92] This
counteracting influence is chiefly exerted by analogy, as we explained
in Chapter V. It is, however, not always analogy which brings about the
readjustment or unification.
We have already had occasion to point out that our word-division, though
undoubtedly based on real and sufficient grounds, is not consistently or
even commonly observed in SPEAKING. Our thoughts are, indeed, expressed
not in words but in word-groups; and letters, even though they stand
at the end or at the beginning of words, have often had a special
phonetic development, in cases where these words occurred in very
frequent or in very intimate connection with other words. The
differences so created have very commonly, though not by any means
universally, found expression in writing. As an instance of a
differentiation of which the written language takes no cognisance, we
may take the French indefinite article. Few are unaware that when un
stands before a consonant the n is not pronounced, leaving in the
spoken word only a trace of its existence in the fact that the vowel is
nasalised. When un comes before a vowel, on the other hand, the vowel
is much less strongly, if at all, nasalised, and the n is clearly
pronounced. Thus (using the circumflex to indicate the nasal quality of
the vowel and ö for the sound of u in un), un père  ö̂ père,
but un ami  ön ami or ö̂n ami. The corresponding difference which
exists in English is expressed in writing: a father, an aunt.
Just as the article is closely connected with the noun, so preposition
and noun, or preposition and verb, are very intimately connected in
pronunciation. Hence--though many, who have never carefully observed
either their own pronunciation or that of others, may dispute or deny
the assertion--in ORDINARY conversation, in the phrases, in town, in
doors, we employ the n sound; but when the word in stands before
Paris and Berlin, we use an m sound, just as we say impossible
by the side of interest. Similarly, we pronounce generally ‘in coming’
with ng for n, just as we speak of a man’s ingcome. This
differentiation of the pronunciation of the preposition in into three
forms--in, im, ing--is not, however, consistently expressed by us
in writing. The Greeks, on the other hand, who similarly differentiated
the terminal consonants of the prepositions in their spoken language,
but on a much larger scale (accustomed as they were to a far closer
correspondence between their spoken and their written language than the
Englishman observes), did actually, in many cases, write as they spoke:
κάδ δὲ,—κὰκ κεφαλὴν, κὰγ γόνυ—κὰπ πεδιόν, etc., instead of employing the
normal form of the preposition, κατά. So we find in inscriptions τὴμ
πόλιν, τὴγ γυναῖκα, τὸλ λογόν, ἐμ πόλει, etc.
The first step on the road towards unification is frequently that the
external reason which caused the difference in form, disappears or loses
force, and one form is found in connections where, historically or
phonetically speaking, the other is correct. We may instance this by the
common mistake of children when they say, e.g., a apple instead of an
apple. In this case, however, the correct form is so very frequently
heard that the encroachment of a on the domains of an is not likely
to lead to permanent confusion. Where, however, circumstances are less
favourable to the preservation of the historically correct usage, it
happens that either form encroaches on the domain of the other, or else
it may result that the encroachment is reciprocal,--when, after a period
of confusion in which both forms are used indifferently, one becomes
obsolete and falls into oblivion, not without often leaving some
striking form or phrase to testify to what once existed. Thus, for
instance, our word here, Old High German hier, or hêr, was, in the
period of transition from Old to Middle High German, differentiated in
accordance with a phonetic law of that time, viz. that final r was
dropped after a long vowel. If not final however, r remained
untouched, and this whether it stood in the body of a word or within a
group of intimately connected words. Of the two forms hie and hier,
the former, as the form employed when the word was used independently,
was in Middle High German often set before words beginning with a vowel;
and we find hie inne ( here-in) or even, by contraction, hinne, for
hier-inne. On the other hand, it is probably owing to the frequency of
combinations similar and equivalent to our here-in, here-upon, etc.,
that the form hier encroached successfully upon the domain of hie,
and finally supplanted it. Hie, however, remained, singularly enough,
in the one expression hie und da (here and there), where the form
without r is not and has never been, phonetically speaking, correct.
An excellent example of this differentiation is furnished by one,
an.
The best example of the process is furnished by the history of the
working of Verner’s law, and of the gradual disappearance of its
effects. We have before (pp. 172, 173) explained this law and quoted
instances of forms created in agreement with it, which have now been
replaced by others. To repeat this explanation here with other examples
would be superfluous; to give a full history, even confining ourselves
to an enumeration of all the various ways in which it has been operative
and the areas of its influence, would transcend the scope of this work.
To carefully note all instances of its occurrence and its neglect, and
to closely investigate the possible courses of the latter, is a task
which may most usefully challenge the attention of philologists. We will
illustrate the truth of this by a single example: (though even this we
cannot discuss exhaustively). The forms which we employ at present as
the past tense of the verb to be--sing. was and plur. (with
grammatical change according to the law) were, belong to a root which
in old English and Anglo-Saxon furnished a complete verb: pres. wese,
past. wæs, p. part. wesen. Now we should naturally expect that in a
time when the grammatical change was still preserved in
  freóse, fréas, fruron, froren, (to freeze) etc.
  ceóse,  céas,  curon,  coren,  (to choose)
  seóðe,  seáð,  sudon,  soden,  (to seethe, to boil)
we should also find that change here, and that accordingly the past
participle should be *weren. That such a form once existed is proved
by the past participle forweorone (cf. Sievers, Anglo-Saxon Grammar, §
391). Everywhere, however, in Anglo-Saxon, in the past participle of
this verb and in that of all similarly conjugated, such as lesan,
læs, lesen; genesan, genæs, genesen, etc., the s has once
more been fully established. The fact that these past participles had
already so far proceeded on the road to unification, while the others as
yet remained isolated, may be explained in this way,--the latter, IN
ADDITION to the differentiation in accordance with Verner’s law, showed
a difference of vowel-sound, which in the case of others did not exist.
Hence the forms differentiated in two distinct ways were able to resist
the tendency towards unification long after those which differed only in
one respect had succumbed. In fact, of the former we still have such
remnants as forlorn, from to lose; sodden, from to seethe. We
may formulate the result which we have illustrated, thus: The greater
the phonetic distance of two differentiated forms, the greater is the
power of resistance against unification and equalisation.
But the ORDER in which we see the traces of the working of Verner’s law
disappear one after another, and the study of such few remnants as still
exist, brings out two other general truths concerning unification. We
may without hesitation affirm that, close as is the etymological
connection between the various tenses of the same verb, or, to speak
perhaps more correctly, that clearly as that connection is felt by the
speech-making community, it is still more strongly felt as between the
various forms of the same tense, or the various cases of the same noun.
Now, it is against the differentiation between the members of these most
intimate groups that unification first takes place. In the declension of
the noun, where nothing but the operation of Verner’s law had separated
the various cases, the re-assimilation first took place, and though we
can prove that, in this case also, the differences actually once
existed--in the historic periods of the Teutonic dialects almost all
traces thereof have been obliterated. In the past tenses of the verbs
they are still at first found, supported as the differentiation had been
by that other force--the gradation of vowels (the ‘ablaut’).[93] But
again: unification between the singular and plural of the past tense
took place first in cases where the vowels were alike in both, and next
in those where the vowels differed--and again, this occurred before
the unification of the past participle with the whole group. In
agreement with this same rule, that very difference of vowel-sound has
completely disappeared in all past singulars and plurals, even
where--as, e.g., in German generally--the past participle still
preserves the ‘ablaut.’
We can then lay it down as a second rule, that the closer the
etymological connection is between differentiated forms, the sooner will
unification be effected; whilst a consideration of such rare instances
as the preservation of the interchange of s and r in I was, we
were, which is clearly due to the very exceptional frequency with which
these forms must always have been used, and the consequent firmness with
which they are impressed on every speaker’s memory, exhibits a third
law, viz. that the greater the intensity with which differentiated
forms are impressed upon the minds of the community, the greater will
prove their power of resistance against unification.
It is further evident that in cases where the differentiation of form
had been accompanied by one in meaning, the tendency towards unification
was counteracted, or rather can never have existed. Thus, the pair of
words glass (etymologically  the shining substance) and glare (to
shine) is separated once and for ever. We have seen the plur. dawes
re-united to sing. day; the verb to dawn has not followed suit.
Though thus much is clear, and when once apprehended, almost
self-evident, we must acknowledge that much is as yet obscure and
unexplained. It is often already very difficult to find any reason why
in one case unification has taken place and not in another, which
apparently presented the same conditions: it is generally harder still
to find an answer to the question why in any given case one form has
prevailed over another, instead of the converse having happened.
Omniscience alone could answer all such questions: but here, again, a
few general observations may serve to explain some points, though, as we
have said, much as yet remains inexplicable. Thus, for example, when
unification replaces the confusion which followed differentiation,
members of the same formal or modal group (that is to say, for instance,
the same parts of speech) are likely to follow in the same direction.
Thus, e.g., in the original Teutonic, when the suffix no was
preceded by a vowel, that vowel varied in the different (strong and
weak) cases of the declensions of nouns, adjectives, and participles,
according to fixed rules, between u and e. This u developed into
o or a, and e into i. Soon unification took place, in some cases
in one, in others in another direction, so that we find, for instance,
in Gothic a form like ðiudAns (king) by the side of maurgIns
(morning), whilst now, the past participles (formed with this same
suffix) all have ans throughout; such participles as became pure
adjectives or nouns have often ins, e.g. gafulgins (adj. ‘secret’),
past participle, of filhan, ‘to hide,’ with fulhans as past
participle,  hidden; aigin (neuter, hence without s in nom.) 
property, is past participle of aigan, ‘to have.’
Sometimes--as, for instance, in the singular and plural of past tense in
strong verbs--a differentiation coincides with difference in function,
though its origin was independent of any such functional divergence.
This, of course, strengthens the phonetic differentiation, and, if such
a coincidence affects simultaneously a formal group of large extent, and
thus becomes a model for analogical formations (Chap. V.), the
originally meaningless phonetic divergence may become indissolubly
associated with difference of function, and so become expressive of the
latter.
Thus, for instance, the words tooth, foot, and man form their
plural teeth, feet, and men by umlaut, and by umlaut alone.
This modification of the vowel is, then, here expressive of plurality.
Originally, however, it was not so. In Anglo-Saxon the declension was--
  Singular Nom. and Acc.   fót    tóð    mann
                    Gen.   fótes  tóðes  mannes
                    Dat.   fét    téð    menn
     Plur. Nom. and Acc.   fét    teð    menn
                           fóta   tóða   manna
                           fótum  tóðum  mannum
When once the combined force of nominative, accusative, and genitive had
ousted the modified vowel from the dative singular, the whole singular
exhibited ó (a) in contrast to the nominative and accusative plural
with é (e). This caused the transference of the latter to the
genitive and dative plural also, and thus invested the modification
with a force originally quite foreign to it.
In English, no doubt owing to the mixed influence upon that language of
two very different grammatical systems (the Teutonic of Anglo-Saxon, and
the Romance of Norman-French), unification has proceeded to a far
greater length than in most other Teutonic dialects. In German, e.g.,
the history of the umlaut and the origin of plurals in er--of which
English has no trace but the provincialism childer, or the “correct”
form children--furnish examples of what we have said; and students of
German will find a careful investigation of that history both
interesting and instructive.
The effect of sound-change is to produce differences in language where
none previously existed; but it likewise tends to cancel existing
differences, and to cause forms originally distinct to resemble each
other or actually to coincide. Now, symmetry and uniformity are clearly
an aid to the memory, when attained by the abolition of useless and
purposeless differences. It is, for instance, in English, far simpler to
state, and far more easy to remember the statement, that all plurals are
formed by adding s to the singular, than that some are formed in -n,
or -en, or by such modifications as man, men; foot, feet;
etc.: and it is therefore a gain to language when such forms as shoon,
eyen, etc., disappear in favour of such forms as shoes, eyes, etc.
On the other hand, the cancelling of such differences when they serve to
mark different functions is naturally disadvantageous and tends to
obscurity. When a sound which marked such a functional difference
disappears, or when of two words or forms which had different meanings
one becomes obsolete, and the other is employed to do service for both,
it is clear that language cannot but be the loser by dispensing with an
important aid to clearness and distinction. Thus, of the two forms mot
and moste, the former has now disappeared, and the latter, in the
form must, serves to indicate both the present and the past tense. The
effect of this ambiguity is that where we wish to clearly indicate the
past of must, we have to employ some idiom in which must has no
place; as ‘was obliged to,’ ‘had to,’ ‘was constrained to,’ etc.
Similarly, the loss of the plural s in very many French nouns (which
s, though still written, is seldom sounded) would create ambiguity
were it not that the difference of the article attached to the noun
marks the difference, and to a large extent remedies the evil; cf.
l’ami, les amis.
The remedy, however, for such obscurity is not always to be found in the
context. Sometimes, indeed, the evil brings its own cure; changes arise
which enable the necessary distinctions to be once more felt and
maintained, creating new forms by analogy with other forms (see Chapter
V.): but, on the other hand, it frequently occurs that the evil remains,
and a confusion follows in the grouping of the words; which grouping, as
we have seen, is all-important in the life history of the members of the
group.
We must in this chapter endeavour to study some of the results of this
confusion, and consequent re-arrangement in the groups; and to
distinguish the cases where similarity caused by phonetic development
affects the matter-groups from those where the modal-groups are
influenced.
I. i. There are many cases where words connected neither by etymology
nor by signification fall into the same form.
Still, in spite of this similarity in form, the words remain perfectly
distinct in the linguistic consciousness of a speaker of ordinary
intelligence. Such are, e.g.,--
1. a. Hale, in such a phrase as hale and hearty. This word is of
Scandinavian[94] origin (cf. Icelandic heill), and represents the
Anglo-Saxon hál, to which word we owe the misspelt word whole. b.
Hale, ‘to drag,’ found in Middle-English as halien.
2. a. Whole  A.S. hál; see above. b. Hole  A.S. hol, ‘a
cave.’[95]
3. a. Grave (A.S. gráfan). b. Grave (Fr. grave, Lat.
gravem).[96]
4. a. Cope (O.Fr. cape). b. Cope (Dutch koopen  to
bargain, to chaffer, to buy, to vie with).
5. a. Stile (A.S. stigel). b. Stile (commonly misspelt
style, Lat. stilum).
6. a. Well, adverb (A.S. wel). b. Well, noun (A.S. wella).
7. a. Arm (Lat. arma). b. Arm, the limb, cognate with Ger.
arm.
8. a. Lay (A.S. lecgan). b. Lay (O.Fr. lais, ‘song’).
9. a. Pale (Fr. pal, Lat. pāum). b. Pale (Fr. pâle, Lat.
pallidum).
10. a. Elder, the tree (A.S. ellarn). b. Elder, ‘older.’
It would, of course, be possible to extend this list to almost any
length; but this would be useless for our purpose, which is to
investigate solely those cases in which similarity causes confusion.
This happens where the difference in origin and meaning is lost sight
of. It is naturally impossible to draw a hard and fast line of
demarcation between the case just discussed and that which we are about
to exemplify, as one speaker may keep distinct what another may confuse
or treat as identical. Still, no one, we may fairly say, unless he be a
student of language, or unless he has been expressly informed, is aware
that in a phrase like The ship is bound for London, the word bound
employed by him has absolutely no connection with the past participle of
the verb to bind. In the first case, bound is of Scandinavian
origin, and meant originally ready, prepared; cf. the Icelandic verb
búa, perf. part, búinn, ‘to prepare.’ Similarly, few ordinary
speakers can explain, or indeed realise, the existence of the
distinction in meaning between shed, ‘a hut’ (a doublet of shade),
and shed in water-shed, when derived from the A.S. scéadan; or
that between sheer, allied to Icelandic skærr, ‘bright,’ and
sheer, akin to Dutch scheren, ‘to shave.’ Thus, again, many might
suppose that some etymological connection existed between hide, ‘a
skin’ (A.S. hýd, akin to Ger. haut), and hide, ‘to conceal’ (A.S.
hídan); while others, when told that hide also served as the name
for a certain measure of land, might naturally even suspect some
allusion to the famous legend of the foundation of Byrsa or Carthage.
The A.S. noun setl (a seat) and the verb settan survive both in the
word settle and in to settle. In employing, however, the word in ‘to
settle a dispute,’ we have a word of very different origin: the A.S.
sacu, ‘a quarrel,’ ‘dispute,’ ‘lawsuit’ (surviving in ‘for my sake’,
etc.), existed side by side with a verb sacan, ‘to strive,’ or
‘dispute:’ akin to this, we find saht, a substantive which owes its
meaning, ‘reconciliation,’ to the development lawsuit, adjustment by
lawsuit, etc. Again, derived from this we have the verb sahtlian, ‘to
reconcile,’ which, at a later period, occurs in the forms saztlen and
sattle.[97] When this verb ceased to be understood, confusion with the
other verb to settle  to fix, to arrange, arose, and the two
forms ‘flowed together, just as two drops of rain running down a
window-pane are very likely to run into one.’[98] Another instance of
this nature is discussed by Professor Skeat, s.v.; viz., sound  A.S.
sund, akin to the Ger. (ge)sund; sound, ‘a strait of the sea,’ and
sound’ M.E. soun, Anglo-Fr. soun or sun, Lat. sonum.
ii. Such forms, where phonetic development brought about merely a close
resemblance without producing perfect similarity, and where, as a next
step, one or other of the set of words underwent some change more or
less violent in consequence of its supposed connection with the rest,
are peculiarly instructive, proving as they do the confusion which arose
in the minds of the speakers who thus combined what was distinct and
unconnected. In these cases we have entered upon the domain of ‘popular
etymology,’ to which we have already incidentally alluded.
It does not, however, always follow that the supposed connection in
meaning--in other words, the coalescence of elements of different origin
into a single material group, brings about the further change in form;
at this period nothing but the linguistic consciousness of the speaker
can decide whether the ‘popular etymology’ is or has been at work. Of
course, as long as the etymology of the different words in the set is
clearly understood by the speaker, there can be no question as to the
connection, but when one or more of the members of the set is no longer
understood in its historical bearings, it is possible for a new grouping
to arise.
Let us take, as an instance, the word carousal. This bore originally
the sense which it bears in the Parisian name of the Place du
Carrousel, viz. a tournament or festival. It was confused with the word
carouse (Ger. gar-aus  properly ‘quite out,’ i.e. ‘empty your
glasses’); and at present our word carousal represents both. The
Anglo-Saxon word bonda meant a boor, or householder. His tenure
appears expressed in Low Latin by the word bondagium, and it is only
to a supposed, but wholly erroneous connection with bond and the verb
to bind, that our present word bondage owes its sense of
servitude.
The Fr. sursis gave us, before its final s had ceased to be
pronounced, our verb surcease, which most speakers now look on as a
compound of cease (Fr. cesser).[99] Wiseacre, really derived
through the Dutch from the Ger. wízago (A.S. witega, ‘a prophet’),
was already, while on its way to England, misunderstood in Holland, and
taken to be a compound of wise. In Dutch, a verb wys-seggen and a
noun wys-segger (‘to speak wisely’ and ‘a wise sayer’) were formed,
and modern German as well possesses the word weissagen, ‘to prophesy.’
This wys-segger, when it reached England, could no longer be
understood as a derivative from the verb secgan, which in English had
already lost its guttural and had become (to) say; and thus popular
etymology altered the second part of the supposed compound into the
meaningless acre. The Fr. surlonge, the piece of meat ‘upon the
loin’ (Lat. super, Fr. sur, and Lat. *lumbea, from lumbus, Fr.
longe), became in English the surloyn in the time of Henry VI. This
was no longer understood; the word was accepted as a compound with the
word sir, and thus the fable was invented of the ‘merry monarch’
knighting the loin.[100] The berfroit or belefreit of Old French is
of German origin, and signifies a watchtower. The word had ceased to be
understood, and its origin was forgotten; but, as many towers contained
a bell or a peal of bells, a supposed connection with these bells caused
the word to be changed into belfry. The spelling is affected in
sovereign, where the g is due to a supposed connection with to
reign (régner, regnare); the real derivation being from soverain
(superaneum), and the word being correctly spelt sovran by Milton.
Further instances are lance-knight ( lanz-knecht  landes knecht
 ‘the knight, i.e. the man-of the land,’ ‘the servant of his
country’); cray-fish ( écrévisse); shamefaced (really
shamefast, like steadfast), etc.
In other cases of rarer occurrence than those which we have discussed, a
significant part of a compound assumes the form of a mere derivative.
This has occurred in the case of the word righteous, taken to be a
derivative from some French adjective in -eux, Lat. -osus, though
really due to right-wise, a compound like otherwise. It is natural
that Proper nouns, where there is no connection or only a fanciful one
between the word and its meaning, should be more liable to such
transformations than others; so the Rose des quatre saisons appears as
the quarter-sessions rose, the asparagus appears as sparrow grass,
the ship Bellerophon becomes the Billy ruffan,[101] the Pteroessa,
the tearing hisser. We may perhaps add here a word like liquorice,
which, though the name, rightly understood, is descriptive, has become a
mere proper noun. Originally from liquiritia, itself a corrupt form of
glykyrrhiza  ‘a sweet root,’ it has, as its spelling shows, become
connected with liquor,[102] while those who deemed this impossible
preferred to explain the word as connected with to lick.[103]
II. Important, then, as the part played by phonetic development is in
bringing about the formation of new material-groups, it has made its
influence felt more widely still in the modal grouping of the various
systems of inflection.
Here, again, two cases should be distinguished: (1) when forms which
have had identical functions come to coincide: (2) when such coincidence
occurs in the case of forms that have had different functions.
1. The cancelling of diversities in form or in inflection when such
inflection indicated no difference in function must obviously on the
whole be set down as a gain to language: simplicity is gained thereby
without any loss in clearness. This gain, however, is only effected
when the abolition is complete; should the abolition be partial only,
simplification may be gained at the expense of a new confusion.
We have an example of such a complete process of cancelling in the
terminations er and est in the comparative and superlative of
adjectives. In Gothic the comparative was formed either with the suffix
iz or ôz, the superlative with ist or with ōst; and, except,
indeed, that the forms in iz and ist were more common than those in
ôz and ôst, and that the latter are found only with stems in a, no
rule can be given for their occurrence. Thus mānags (an a stem) has
in its comparative managiz-a, superlative managists; alðeis (ja
stem) alðiza, alðists; hardus (u stem), hardiza, hardists;
but frôðs, frôdôza, frôdôsts; arms, armôza, armôsts.[104] In
Old High German there was a similar uncertainty. Here the z of Gothic
appeared as r in the comparatives,[105] and while salîg has for its
comparative salîgôro and its superlative salîgôsto, we find
(h)reini, (h)reiniro, (h)reinisto.[106] In Anglo-Saxon we find
already but a single termination for the comparative, viz. ra; but the
two forms of superlative are still extant in ost and est; earm,
earmra, earmost; heard, heardra, heardost; but eald,
ieldra (with umlaut or modified vowel),[107] ieldest. Our forms
hard, harder, hardest; old, older, oldest; silly,
sillier, silliest, etc., are clearly a further step in the right
direction of simplicity in system.
The convergence is, however, not always complete: sometimes it happens
that two systems coincide; and this coincidence may be (1) in ALL FORMS
but only in SOME WORDS belonging to each system; or, again, (2) it may
manifest itself in ALL WORDS but only in SOME FORMS; and, lastly, this
coincidence may affect (3) only SOME WORDS in SOME FORMS of two
converging systems.
In the case of (1) the convergence is complete and irrevocable, and
words which formerly belonged to one system have simply parted company
with it, and have definitely joined the other to which they were
assimilated. In the cases, however, of (2) and (3), confusion must
arise, and further development must be looked for. We find a good
illustration of this confusion and of its development in the history of
the Teutonic declensions. In the case of these, as of other
Indo-European languages, the declensions differed as the stems of the
words terminated in a consonant or a vowel; and amongst the latter,
again, we must draw distinctions between the declension of stems in a,
(o), i, and u. In the a declension, again, a subdivision arose
for pure a, ja, wa, and long ā stems. These different
terminations of the stems are, for instance, clearly preserved in Gothic
dat. and acc. plur. dags, dagam, dagans; gasts, gastim,
gastins; sunus, sunum, sununs; and (with Gothic ō instead of
ā) gibā, gibōm, gibōs. In the oldest forms of Scandinavian, the
so-called Ur-Norse, also, we find the vowels preserved in the nominative
singular, holingar, erilar, etc., gastir, staldir, etc.,
haukoður, warur:[108] but even in these, the oldest forms of the
Teutonic dialects accessible to us, the various systems were confused;
and it is the study of Comparative Grammar that we have to thank for the
distinction between the different classes; and, again, it is only owing
to the light shed on the subject by the comparison with Latin, Greek,
and Sanskrit cognates, that we are enabled in some instances to decide
to which of these classes any given word belongs. The ‘wearing down’ of
the various terminations produced here identity, elsewhere close
resemblance of many cases in many words, while in other cases the
influence of the preceding letter made itself felt, and a difference in
declension arose for the a stems: this difference depending on whether
the a was preceded by a consonant i (j) or w. Where phonetic
development had caused some of the cases to agree, other cases soon
followed suit, and thus we find, for instance, that even in Gothic the
entire singular of i declension has already become identical with that
of the a stems:--
               a stem.    i stem.
  Sing. Nom.   dags       balgs
        Gen.   dagis      balgis
        Dat.   daga       balga
        Acc.   dag        balg
        Voc.   dag        balg
  Plur. Nom.   dagôs      balgeis
        Gen.   dagê       balgê
        Dat.   dagam      balgim
        Acc.   dagans     balgins.
As a consequence of this, numerous words which cognate languages prove
to belong to the i declension are nevertheless entirely declined like
a stems in Gothic; and even in the very few Gothic texts which we
possess, and though these are derived from one source only, we meet with
words evidencing the fact that Ulfilas himself (or, it may be, his
copyist) was sometimes confused as to the declension usually followed by
some word in his own language. Thus, in case of wêgs (a wave), we find
norm plur. wêgôs, but dat. plur. wêgim; so too, the dat. plur. of
aiws is aiwam, while the accus. is aiwins. In Old High German the
coincidence in termination between these two schemes goes further, and
extends over all cases; but since--in such words as had a, o, or
u, in the preceding syllable--umlaut had been produced in the plural
by the i of the stem, only those words whose stem vowel would not
admit of umlaut or modification became throughout identical with the
a declension. Where the reverse was the case, the words naturally
remained distinct in the plural, and a further development arose; viz.
that this umlaut in the plural began to be regarded as a sign of that
number, and to be used for the purpose of marking it even in words whose
etymology afforded no justification for the change, e.g. in hand,
hände, which word originally belonged to the u declension. See also
our remarks in Chapter V. pp. 87 and foll.
2. So far, in every case which we have discussed, we have had to do with
similarity arising from phonetic development of forms with identical
functions: one or more cases of one system converged with the same
cases in another system. Often, however, this same phonetic development
creates a similarity between forms which were originally distinct and
served distinct purposes; and we have a good instance of this in our
personal pronouns, and one which is instructive as to the consequences
of this phenomenon:--
  The Gothic   ik     meina    mis     mik
               ðu     ðeina    ðus     ðuk
               weis   unsara   uns     uns
               jus    izwara   izwis   izwis
already shows no difference in the forms of accusative and dative
plural; but in Anglo-Saxon we find that a further stage has been
reached:--
  In ic  mín    mé   mé
     ðú  ðín    ðé   ðé
     wé  úser   ús   ús
     gé  eówer  eów  eów
we see (though separate forms for accusative still occur) that dative
and accusative have become identical throughout, and so it is in the
modern language with--
  I           mine   me
  thou        thine  thee
  we          our    us
  ye (you)  your   you
The double form of the nominative ye (you), and more especially the
history of the pronoun for the third person, illustrate one of the
consequences of such coincidence, viz. that the language-producing
community becomes accustomed to use the same form for certain sets of
functions, and transfers this similarity to cases which it would not
reach--or, at least, has not yet reached--by the aid of phonetic
development alone. Let us consider first the pronoun of the third
person. In Anglo-Saxon we find--
  Sing.  Masc.     Fem.   Neuter.
  Nom.   hé     heó    hit
  Gen.   his    hire   his
  Dat.   him    hire   him
  Acc.   hine   hí     hit.
The forms which we now use for the plural are derived from a different
stem,[109] which in Anglo-Saxon gave us the following plural for all
three genders:--
  Nom.  ðá
  Gen.  ðára, or ðǽra
  Dat.  ðǽm
  Acc.  ðá
and here we find distinct forms for dative and accusative, the latter of
which has now disappeared, so that here, too (as in the case of the
other personal pronouns), we use one form only (the original dative
form) for both dative and accusative. But we have only reached this
stage after a period of confusion and uncertainty, during which the
historically correct form of the accusative and the new form (that of
the old dative) strove for permanence.
It is the very marked difference between ic (I) and me (accus.),
ðu (thou) and ðe, we and us, which has protected the members
of these pairs from becoming identical in form, notwithstanding the
important fact that such a process had long since identified the
nominative and accusative of all nouns and adjectives. To this
influence, indeed, ye and you (both of which, when unemphatic,
become ye, where e is pronounced as in the before a consonant)
have succumbed.
Not only in this way, moreover, does such convergence of forms with
different functions show its effect: it also causes the ordinary speaker
to lose sight of such difference in function altogether. As students of
Latin, and especially teachers of that language, know by sad experience,
it is extremely hard for the untrained English mind to realise the
function of the accusative case; and the difference between this case
and the dative may be fairly described as non-existent for the
Englishman who has not learnt it from the study of other languages.
This, again, influences syntax, so that a phrase like I showed him the
room can be turned in the passive into The room was shown (to) him,
etc., or He was shown the room, etc.
The careful consideration of such a form as I breakfasted will lead us
to understand another phase in the life history of our words, and in the
development of their syntactical combinations. It is well known that the
word (to) breakfast is really a compound of the verb to break and
the noun fast (ieiunium). Accordingly, we find, about the year 1400
A.D., ‘Ete and be merry, why breke yee nowt your fast;’ in 1653,
Izaak Walton wrote, ‘My purpose is to be at Hodsden before I break my
fast;’ and as late as 1808, Scott writes in his Marmion, ‘and knight
and squire had broke their fast.’[110] In these and similar cases,
the words have retained their full and original meaning of ‘to put an
end to fasting by eating;’ and the natural apprehension of this compound
when employed as a noun was in the sense of the meal whereby this
process is effected after the night’s fasting, i.e. the first meal
taken in the day. When once the verb had thus acquired the meaning of
‘to take the first meal in the day,’ and was next applied even in cases
where so little food had been taken before that meal as to be hardly
worth considering a ‘meal,’ the meaning of ‘breaking the fast’ had been
effaced by the new sense of eating the first IMPORTANT meal of the
day. The change of meaning, coupled with the change in function,
disconnected the compound from the linguistic groups to which it had
hitherto belonged, and so it came about that, after the analogy of other
verbs formed from nouns, to breakfast was conjugated as a weak verb.
Thus, in 1679, Everard writes, After breakfasting peaceably; and about
a century later, the word is used transitively in the sense of ‘to
entertain at breakfast,’ e.g., They will breakfast you, or I was
breakfasted.[111]
This and all the following examples to be discussed in this chapter
illustrate the point that, in the unconscious grouping of our words into
material and modal groups, it is mainly the function of the word which
causes such grouping; and that a change of function, entailing, as it
does, a change in the grouping, will often expose the word which has
thus altered its meaning to the influence of analogy with other groups,
though as long as it preserved its original meaning it stood quite apart
from them. No doubt, however, similarity of form conduces also sometimes
to this end. The group to which the word once belonged will then follow
its own path of development, while the detached member will go on its
new way.
We have a similar instance in vouchsafe: The king vouches it SAUE
(Robert of Brunne, early in fourteenth century), where we should now
say: The king vouchsafes. The verb to backbite is most probably a
derivative from the compound nouns back-biting (of which the earliest
instance dates from 1175) and backbitter (which is found as early as
1230); while in the Early English Psalter (A.D. 1300) the past tense is
still formed bac-bate. Gower (1393) already formed the past participle
back bited.[112] Again, the noun browbeating (from ‘to beat one’s
brows,’ i.e. ‘to lower the brows,’ ‘to frown’), found as early as
1581,[113] became, from a compound noun, a simple one with the meaning
of scolding or teasing; and gave rise to a verb to browbeat, of which
the earliest known instance dates from 1603. It is, however, doubtful
whether this verb has hitherto been definitely separated from the group
to which etymologically speaking it belongs. The past participle
brow-beat (1803; Jane Porter, Thaddeus) occurs, it is true, but the
more usual form is as yet browbeaten.
The most ordinary results of this process are, of course, all the
numerous formations from nouns that have been pressed into the service
of verbs; as, I box, He boxed; (to) dust, (to) soap, (to) dog,
etc., etc.: in the case of all which, the change of function must have
preceded all forms due to analogy with the groups into which the word
entered solely in consequence of that change. So, again, as long as a
word has an adjectival function, and even when it is used substantively,
but retains its original attributive meaning, it is, in English, not
declined: as the POOR men; the POOR ye have with you always;
the BLUE hats. When, then, only certain individuals belonging to the
class designated by the adjective have to be indicated--and not, as in
the case of the poor,--all the individuals possessing the quality of
poverty,--we resort to the addition of the word ones: as, I do not
like those green hats; I prefer the blue ONES. As soon, however, as the
word loses its real signification, and passes into a proper noun, it is
at once declined: as, the Grays, the Pettys, the Quicklys; the
Blues, the Liberals, the Conservatives, etc.[114]
It may happen that the position of the accent aids to produce change of
function, as in the case of prófecto (pró facto), and in the very
interesting case of igitur, which has been shown to be the enclitic
form of agitur, originating in the common Plautine phrase (Quḯd
agitur) Quíd igitur.[115]
The case is similar with the adverbial termination -ment in French and
-mente in Italian, from the Latin mente. Cruellement (crudeli
mente) and fièrement are intelligible formations; but solidement,
lourdement, etc., are formed upon their analogy. At first applied only
to adverbs of manner, the termination was transferred to adverbs of time
and space; as, anciennement, largement. Our English termination
-ly (from like) is a familiar instance of the same degradation of
the final syllable: cf. godlike, by the side of godly.
The word self was originally an adjective meaning in Anglo-Saxon and
Middle-English ‘the same,’ and declined in apposition with the noun or
personal pronoun to which it was attached to mark emphasis. It then
stood in the same case, number, and gender, he selfe, his selfes,
him selfum, hine selfne, etc., gen. and dat. sing. fem. hyre
selfre, etc. The history of the development from this usage to our
present one is not quite clear; but we should remember that the
terminations of the adjective were among the first to wear off
completely, or at least to become confused and indistinct; and, further,
that the accusative of the personal pronouns, was at an early date
merged into the dative. We thus obtain the following schematic
declension:--
SINGULAR.
  Nom.    I self   thou self  he, she, it self
  Gen.    my self  thy self   his, her, his self
  Acc. }
  Dat. }  me self  thee self  him, her, him self
PLURAL.
  Nom.    they selve
  Gen.    their selve
  Acc. }  them selve
  Dat. }
Now, if we bear in mind that in these combinations the accent fell upon
the word self (or selve), and that consequently the proclitic forms
my, me, and thy, thee, in the genitive and dative had the same
sound respectively,--and, further, that in the feminine of the third
person singular (herself), these two cases were also alike,--it does
not seem strange (1) that these two cases (genitive and dative) became
confused, and (2) that the word self became a noun, as exemplified in
such phrases as I said it to herself. Once having changed its
function, the word assumed the flection of the new group to which its
new function had attached it, and a plural form, as of a noun,
arose--themselves, ourselves, theirselves.[116] When once a single
form served in three (genitive, dative, accusative) of the four cases,
it not unnaturally succeeded in ousting the last, and succeeded all the
more easily as I self was, of course, wrong, if self was a noun.
It is not, however, an invariable rule that the new associations into
which a word enters in consequence of its change of function entail a
change of form in the word. In Latin the word frugi was originally the
dative case of a word frux, gen. frugis, meaning fruit, profit,
advantage; and is actually employed by Plautus, with the full
consciousness of its origin, in the phrase bonæ frugi esse (Asin.,
III. iii. 12). In fact, this use is exactly parallel to the use of
usui in bono usui estis nulli, in Plautus, Curculio, l. 499; but in
this case, usui, owing to its frequent occurrence, preserved the
memory of its origin fresh. Cicero, however, treats frugi simply as an
indeclinable adjective: Homines et satis fortes et satis plane frugi et
sobrii (In Verrem, v. 27). Instances are also frequent where a change
in meaning brings about a change in syntactical construction. Thus, for
instance, in Latin we find that the nominative quisque is coupled with
the reflective pronoun in the plural almost in the signification of
singulatim.[117] In Plautus we find præsente testibus (Amphitruo,
II. ii. 203), and, in Afranius and Terence, absente nobis (Eunuchus,
IV. iii. 7); in these cases the participles approach the characteristics
of prepositions. A similar development gave to the present participle
considering its present prepositional force. Macte is used
similarly. Age! in Latin is used as generally as Come! in English,
irrespective of the number of persons addressed; cave is used in the
same way. Paucis is used for ‘a little’ in ausculta paucis (Terence,
Andria, 536). Hélas is used in French by women equally as by men;
φέρε, ἰδού, in Old Greek, are addressed to either one or many persons
indifferently. In the same way, in late Greek, ὤφελον and ὤφελε were
employed simply as conjunctions, without any consideration of number or
person, the original construction having been Ὀλέσθαι ὤφελον τῇδ’ ἡμέρᾳ
 ‘Would that I had perished on that day!’ In English albeit is used
simply as a conjunction, and may be, in the sense of perhaps, is
showing a tendency to fuse into one word, as it is actually written in
American conversational language mebbe.
In German we find expressions like Heb hinten über sich das glas,
‘Raise your glass high’ (Uhland, Volkslieder) instead of über dich. In
the same way we find in Latin suo loco, etc.; and in Latin law
formulæ, Si sui juris sumus, where we should expect Si nostri juris
sumus (i.e. ‘If we stand in our own rights’). In Old Norse a middle
and passive is formed by the aid of a reflective -sik (sese), which
is, of course, properly applicable to the third person only: it appears
later as -st; thus, at kalla, ‘to call;’ at kallast, ‘to be
called.’ In the same way, we have in English the words (to) bask and
(to) busk,[118] where the proper meaning of the termination has so
completely died out that it is possible to write busk ye. The passive
is similarly formed in the Slavonic languages.
Again, change of meaning influences the construction in the case of
numerous verbs in Latin, which are properly intransitive, but are used
as transitives. Such are perire,[119] deperire; demori, used in
the sense of ‘to be mortally enamoured of;’ stupere, ‘to marvel at;’
ardere, ‘to love with fire:’ the last-mentioned two words approximate
in sense to mirari and amare respectively, and hence the instinct of
language employs them in the same government.
The verb to doubt, in the etymological signification of hesitating
between two beliefs, was, and is still constructed with whether. If,
however, Spenser (Faëry Queene) says--
    ‘That makes them doubt their wits be not their aine,’
it is because the word is employed in this case, as indeed it frequently
is in Shakespeare, in the sense of ‘to fear.’
The verb to babble, originally used intransitively, means to prattle
or to chatter. When, however, it is employed in the sense of ‘to speak
foolish words.’ or of ‘to reveal by talking,’ it is used with an object
in the accusative case, and a passive is formed of it; e.g., Griefs too
sacred to be babbled to the world. Again, compound words, as long as
they are felt as such by the speakers, are naturally treated as such;
cf. the Latin word respublica, which, though we write it as a single
word, was declined in both its parts, respublica, reipublicæ, etc.
But, when it had once become an indivisible unit--when the form
république in French, or the English word republic, was formed with
its various meanings, all closely resembling, but not identical with,
that of the original compound, the word came to be treated after the
analogy of other nouns, and the same derivatives are formed from it as
from a simple form; cf. republican, etc. This fact is, again,
instanced by such forms as high-spirited (high-spirit + ed, and not
high + spirited), gentleman-like (gentleman + like, not gentle +
manlike), good-natured (goodnature + ed, not good + natured).
Similarly, the Latin compound i (a demonstrative pronoun) + pse was
at first declined as eumpse (e.g., Plautus, Truc., I. ii. 64),
eampse, eopse, eapse, etc., all which forms are found in
Plautus.[120] When, however, the word came to be looked on as a simple
word, it was declined as such: ipsum, ipsam, ipso, ipsa, etc.
In German there are many instances of words compounded with adverbs of
place which are specially instructive as to the way in which a word may
become detached from its previous use by a change of meaning. For
instance, in modern German the usage is to say wirken AUF etwas, and
not IN etwas, which was the usage even in the last century. In the
same way, we speak of influence over as much as of influence on,
showing that we have forgotten the significance of in.[121]
The word welcome in such phrases as I made them welcome is employed
as an adjective, as, indeed, it is commonly apprehended to be. It was
originally a substantive, and was derived from the infinitive mood of
the verb, its meaning being pleasure-comer. The word is popularly
supposed to derive from well and come; but the first element in the
compound is really related to will--the true sense being the
will-comer, i.e. he who comes to please another’s will. (Cf. Ger.
willkommen.) The change in meaning seems due to Scandinavian
influence, for in the Scandinavian languages the word is really
composed of the adjective well and the past participle come; cf.
Danish velkommen (welcome).[122]
The expression Quin conscendimus equos (Livy, i. 57) is properly Why
do we not mount our horses? but is understood as Let us mount our
horses; and in accordance with such usage quin may take after it an
imperative, as quin age; or a hortative subjunctive, as quin
experiamur? The sense of cur in some cases approximates to that of
quod; and hence we find the word followed by a similar construction,
in Horace, Ep. I. 8. 9;--irascar amicis, Cur me funesto properent
arcere veterno. The O.Fr. car underwent a similar change. Derived
from quare it meant, in the first instance, then; as, Cumpainz
Rolond, l’oliphant KAR sunez (Chanson de Roland), i.e. Compagnon
Roland sonnez DONC l’oliphant;[123] it next came to be used like
que or parceque after phrases like la raison est; and it then
comes to be used with the conditional and imperative in the sense of
utinam (cf. Diez, iii. 214).
In O.Fr. the word par (Latin per) was used for much. It took this
sense from its use in combinations like perficere, perraro, etc.,
but it was detached from the verb, and was habitually used in O.Fr. in
such combinations as par fut proz  il fut très preux; and in some
cases coupled with other adverbs, like moult and tant; as, tant par
fut bels  il était si beau, literally tant beaucoup (Chanson de
Roland). The phrase survives in par trop[124].
The Greek οὐκ οῦν, originally not therefore, like the Latin nonne,
serves to introduce a question expecting an affirmative answer. It then
comes to be used to introduce direct positive assertions; thus, οὐκοῦν
ἐλευθερία ἡμᾶς μένει; from meaning ‘Does not, then, freedom await us?’
comes to mean simply ‘Therefore freedom awaits us.’ The word nanu in
Sanskrit has gone through a similar development. Ne in Latin, properly
the interrogative particle, comes to be used as the correlative of
an:--faciatne an non faciat; or even faciat, necne. Similarly, in
Russian, the interrogative particle li comes to be used as the
correlative of ili (or); as ugodno-li vam eto? (‘Is this agreeable
to you?’); but we then get combinations like dyélaet-li, ili ne
dyélaet (‘whether he does it or no’).
The accusative with an infinitive could originally only stand in
connection with a transitive verb as long as the accusative of the
subject was regarded as the object of the finite verb, as audio te
venire; but the accusative and infinitive came to be regarded as a
dependent sentence with the accusative as its subject, and then we find
the construction after words like gaudeo, horreo (Livy, xxxiv. 4.
3), doleo (Horace, Odes, iv. 4. 62), etc., which can properly speaking
take no accusative of the object connected with them; as gaudere,
dolere, infitias ire; nay, we find it after combinations such as
spem habeo, etc. The accusative and infinitive construction then
passes into sentences which depend on another accusative and infinitive,
as (1) into relative sentences loosely connected; e.g. mundum censent
regi numine Deorum--ex quo illud natura consequi (Cic. de Fin., iii.
19, § 64): (2) into sentences of comparison; e.g. ut feras quasdam
nulla mitescere arte sic immitem ejus viri animum esse (Livy, xxxiii.
45): (3) into indirect questions; e.g. quid sese inter pacatos facere,
cur in Italiam non revehi (Livy, xxviii. 24);[125] (4) into temporal
and causal sentences; e.g. crimina vitanda esse, quia vitari metus non
posse (Seneca, Epist., 97. 13). A similar extension of the use is found
in Greek.
The possessive cases mine, thine, his, her, its, our,
your, their have passed into the category of adjectives, as in the
case of Shall I not take mine ease in mine inn? (1 Henry IV., III.
iii. 93). The instinct of language regarded mine, thine, etc., as
the equivalents of of me, of thee, etc.; and marked the function by
the addition of the possessive preposition of, as in this inn of
mine. Thus, again, a gerund like killing,[126] from having the same
form as the participle, can be used in expressions like the killing a
man, instead of the killing of a man.
We not only find that the word which changes its function undergoes the
consequent changes in form or in syntax, but it also often happens that,
owing to functional changes participated in by a certain group of words,
such a group becomes detached, and thereby gains independence enough to
influence other words that have cognate meanings. There are in Old
English, as in German, many adverbs which are in their origin the
genitives singular of strong masculine and neuter substantives, such as
dæges (by day); but the origin of the termination has been
forgotten, and the s has come to be looked upon as a merely adverbial
termination. Consequently we find the adverb nihtes (by night),
though niht is really feminine, and its genitive case is properly
nihte. Similar formations are hereabouts, inwards, othergates
(Shakespeare, Twelfth Night, V. i. 198), towards, whereabouts, etc.
In the same way, the genitive plural of Anglo-Saxon substantives in
-ung (later -ing) could be used adverbially; as,--án-ung-a,
án-ing-a, (altogether), genitive plural of ân-ung, a substantive
formed from án (one): after this analogy others were formed: as,
hedling, afterwards altered to headlong; darkling, etc.
We have already more than once had occasion to point out that, in our
individual vocabularies, two classes of words are inextricably confused.
In the first place, we employ such words and derivatives of words as we
REPRODUCE by the aid of MEMORY, which recalls to us what we have
frequently heard from those with whom we have intercourse. In the second
place, another part of our stock of words and verbal derivatives is
FORMED by us on the MODEL OF OTHER FORMATIONS of the first class.
Only in a very few cases is it possible for any speaker to decide, with
absolute certainty, whether any particular form which he may employ with
perfect familiarity belongs to the former or the latter group. If, for
instance, we hear the simple sentence, ‘He is walking,’ there is nothing
which can help us to determine whether the speaker is merely reproducing
the word walking just as he has learnt it from others, or whether he
is forming the present participle of and from the word ‘(to) walk’ after
the model of other similar derivatives. In the chapter on Analogy, we
considered principally cases falling under the second class, in which
the result of such a process as we have described proved at variance
with other forms already existing in the language, i.e. where
Analogy brought about certain changes. The cases in which the result
was the mere production of what we should have reproduced by the simple
aid of memory, we considered as of very small importance for the purpose
of illustrating the operations of Analogy.
But it is far from true that they have no significance. Every time that
we consciously or unconsciously form words ‘by analogy,’ our habit of
doing so is strengthened, and our confidence in the results is
increased; and the more we enter upon domains of thought where we are
comparative strangers, the more confidently and the more consciously do
we proceed ‘to make our own words.’ In this process of word-making, we
follow certain models; in fact, we derive one form from others which
exist in our own vocabulary.
In words and forms reproduced by memory (though only in the case of such
as these) it is, strictly speaking, correct to say of each form--tense,
person, singular or plural, or of each case--that it is derived, not
from what our grammars call the standard forms (such as infinitives or
nominative-singulars), but from the corresponding older form of that
tense, person, etc., in the language as it existed before.
In words and forms produced, not from memory, but by analogy, i.e. by
derivation according to a certain model, and from words which already
exist in our own vocabulary, even where our result does not differ from
what we might have produced by memory, it does not at all follow that
our process of derivation has been the same as that by which former
speakers reached their results.
For instance, suppose that there exists a class of adjectives really
derived from verbs. In the course of development of the language, these
verbs approach in form to the cognate nouns, or--for whatever
reason--some of the verbs become obsolete. The effect will be that, in
the consciousness of the ordinary speaker, the adjective appears as
derived from the noun.
It is our object in this chapter to study the phenomenon of such
displacements in the etymological connections and the consequences which
follow therefrom.
A good instance may be found in the history of the suffixes ble,
able, and their application.[127] Both these suffixes we owe to the
French language, which, in turn, derived them from Latin.
In this latter language we find the suffix bili-s, bilem, forming
verbal adjectives. Where the stem of the verb ended in a consonant, the
connecting vowel i was inserted: vend-e-re, vend-i-bilis. Where
the stem ended in a vowel this insertion was of course unnecessary:
honora-re, honora-bilis, dele-re, delebilis, (g)no-scere
no-bilis, etc. By far the greater number of these words in ble were
derived from verbs in are, of which the present participle ends in
ans, antem. Hence, though the words in ble were in reality not
immediately derived from this participle, a feeling arose that such a
connection existed. Among ‘the matter-groups’ in French their existed
numerous pairs, such as aimant, aimable, etc. In time, all present
participles in French came to end in this termination ant, after which
an adjective in able, derived from such participles, nearly always
supplanted the older and correcter forms in ible, etc. Hence came
forms like vendable, croyable, etc.
The suffix able, introduced into English in enormously preponderating
numbers, was there at first confined to words of French origin, but
soon, by analysis of such instances as pass-able, agree-able,
commend-able, was treated as an indivisible living suffix, and freely
employed to form analogous adjectives, being attached not only to verbs
taken from French, but finally to native verbs as well, e.g.,
bearable, speakable, breakable. These verbs have often a
substantive of the same form, as in debat(e)-able, rat(e)-able, etc.
Owing to this, a new displacement such as we are here studying occurred,
and such words, treated as if derived FROM THE NOUN, became the models
for others where able is added to nouns, such as marketable,
clubbable, carriageable,[128] salable.
Another suffix, the history of which affords an instance of similar
displacement is ate as verbal formative.[129]
We find in French several past participles, some due to regular
historical development of the popular language, others to deliberate
adoption by the learned classes, all of which differ only from their
Latin prototypes in having lost the termination us: e.g., confusus,
Fr. confus; contentus, content; diversus, divers. This analogy
was widely followed in later French in introducing new words from Latin,
and, both classes of French words (i.e. the popular survivals and the
later accessions) being adopted in English provided English in its turn
with analogies for adapting similar words directly from Latin by
dropping the termination. This process began about 1400 A.D., and the
Latin termination atus gave English at, subsequently ate, e.g.
desolatus, desolat, desolate. The transition of these words from
adjectives and participles to verbs is explained by Dr. Murray by a
reference to the fact--
(a) That in Old English verbs had been regularly formed from
adjectives: as, hwit, hwitian (‘white,’ ‘to whiten’); wearm,
wearmian (‘warm,’ ‘to warm,’); etc.
(b) That with the loss of the inflections, these verbs became by the
fifteenth century identical in form with the adjectives, e.g., to
white, to warm.
(c) That, as in Latin, so in French, many verbs were formed on
adjectives; whence, again, English received many verbs identical in form
with their adjectives, e.g., to clear, to humble, to manifest.
These verbs, though formed immediately from participial adjectives
already existing in English, answered in form to the past participles of
Latin verbs of the same meaning. It was thus natural to associate them
directly with these Latin verbs, and to view them as their regular
English representatives. This once done, it became the recognised method
of Englishing a Latin verb, to take the past participle stem of the
Latin as the present stem of the English, so that English verbs were now
formed on Latin past participles by mere analogy and without
intervention of a participial adjective; e.g., fascinate,
concatenate, etc. These English verbs in ate correspond generally
to French verbs in er,--e.g., separate, Fr. séparer; this, in
turn, gave a pattern for the formation of English verbs from
French,--e.g., isoler (Ital. isolare, Lat. insulare), Eng.
isolate, etc.
To this lucid and apparently adequate explanation we must, however, add
another fact, which has demonstrably aided in the formation of the
enormous number of English verbs in ate. From the fourteenth century
onward, we find again and again such pairs as action (1330), to act
(1384);[130] affliction (1303), to afflict (1393); adjection
(1374), to adject (1432); abjection (1410), to abject (1430),
etc.[131]
Such pairs led to the supposition that the verbs were derivable from the
nouns in tion by merely omitting the ion, and this was done with
many nouns in ation even where another verb (itself the ground-word
for that form in ation) existed by the side of it. Thus we find, e.g.,
aspiration (1398), to aspire (1460), the verb aspirate (1700);
attestation (1547), to attest (1596), to attestate (1625);
application (1493), to apply (1374), to applicate (1531).[132]
The suffix full forms adjectives from nouns: baleful, A.S.
bealofull from bealu (woe, harm, mischief); shameful, A.S.
sceamfull from sceam (shame). This ending was also added to nouns of
Romance origin; e.g., powerful, fruitful. In both classes, however,
the word might, in very many cases, be just as well derived from a verb
as from a noun, so that, e.g., thankful, which originally undoubtedly
was  full of thanks, could equally well be apprehended as he who
thanks; respectful, as he who respects; etc. It is similar with
such words as harmful, delightful, etc. That such a grouping has
actually been made, is proved by the occurrence of such forms as
wakeful, forgetful, and the dialectical urgeful; so also the form
weariful seems more likely to be interpreted as that which wearies,
than as a derivative from the adjective weary as Mätzner seems to take
it.[133] So, again, the form maisterful, found in Lydgate and
Chaucer,[134] seems more likely to be taken as ‘he who is always
mastering,’ than ‘as he who is full of master,’ which gives no sense.
The suffix less, originally and still as a rule only added to nouns,
could not have been used with the verb to daunt (--O.Fr. danter,
Modern French, dompter, Lat. domitare, ‘to tame,’) if in such
compounds as restless, sleepless, hopeless, useless, the noun
had not been identical in form with the verb.
The history of the suffix ness, is also especially instructive for our
purpose. If we go back to the oldest records of the Teutonic languages,
Gothic, we find a noun, ufarassus, literally ‘overness,’ used in the
sense of ‘abundance,’ ‘superfluity,’ from ufar, ‘over:’ similarly
formed was ibnassus, ‘equality,’ from ibns--‘even,’ ‘equal.’ This
suffix assus was very frequently added to the stem of verbs which,
in their turn, were derived from nouns. Thus, for instance, besides the
noun--
  lekeis (leach), we find lekinon (to cure),       lekinassus (leachdom).
  shalks (servant),  ”    shalkinon (to serve),    shalkinassus (service).
  gudja (priest),    ”    gudjinon (to be priest), gudjinassus (priesthood).
  frauja (Lord),     ”    fraujinon (to rule),     fraujinassus (dominion).
  ðiudans (king),    ”    ðiudanon (to be king),   ðiudinassus (kingdom).
In all these and similar cases, however, etymological consciousness
might equally well operate otherwise. It might, for instance, derive a
noun meaning kingdom from another noun denoting king, or one meaning
priesthood from one denoting priest. That this has been done is
proved by the fact that the n has coalesced completely with the suffix
assus, forming nassus, or, in its more modern form, ness. Even in
Gothic, this coalescence has already been powerful enough to produce
vaninassus (want) from vans (adjective  ‘wanting,’ ‘less;’ found,
e.g., in wanhope  ‘lack of hope,’ ‘despair:’ wanton, 
‘uneducated,’ ‘untrained,’ ‘unrestricted,’ ‘licentious:’ and wane 
‘to grow less’).
In Anglo-Saxon, adverbs were formed from adjectives by means of the
termination e: for instance, heard, hearde, (‘hard’) ; sóð,
sóðe, (‘true,’ cf. soothsayer and forsooth); wíd, wíde,
(wide). Adjectives in lic were formed first from nouns: eorð,
eorðlic, (‘earth,’ ‘earthy’); gást, gastlic, (‘ghost,’ ‘ghostly’),
etc.; and then, also, from other adjectives, as heard-heardlic,
æðele-æðelic, (for æðel-lic), etc.
By the side of these adjectives, we naturally find adverbs in lice,
normally formed from them by the addition of e; as, æðelice, etc.;
but as soon as, owing to phonetic decay of the terminations, the
adjectives and adverbs in both sets of words (both in those with and
without lic) came respectively to coincide,--when, for instance,
heard and hearde had both become hard, and adjectives in lic and
adverbs in lice had both come to terminate in ly,--then the
adjective that had never ended in lic came also to be grouped with the
adverb in lice, or rather ly, and ly became the special and normal
adverbial termination: as in prettily, carelessly, etc. Thus were
produced a great quantity of adverbs, the adjectives corresponding to
which never had the termination ly.
Modern English possesses remnants of all the above original formations;
as, for instance, the adverbs (with loss of adverbial e) hard, in
‘to hit hard,’ loud, in ‘to speak loud,’ etc.; or, again, the
adjectives heavenly, earthly, kingly, goodly, etc.
Language develops by the development of the vocabulary of individual
speakers in the same linguistic community: their tendency is to produce
synonymous forms and constructions in addition to those already at their
disposal. Each individual is, in fact, constantly engaged in increasing
the number of synonymous words, forms, and constructions in the language
which he speaks. One source of this superfluous development depends on
analogical formation: as when in English the imperfect is assimilated to
the participle, or the participle to the imperfect; as where forms like
spoke and broke appear beside spake and brake or held, beside
holden.
A second source of the same superfluity depending on synonyms arises
from the fact that of two words, each may develop its meaning on its own
lines, and the meanings may come to converge so as to become one and the
same. Thus, for instance, the two words relation and relative, the
former originally the abstract verbal noun, the latter an adjective,
have converged in the meaning ‘a related person;’ and it has thus
happened that owing to this process there arise two terms for one and
the same idea. To the above a third source may be added; viz., the
acceptance of a foreign word into a language where a native word
already exists to express the same idea. Of course English is especially
rich in words of this kind, owing to the large number of Norman-French
words imported at the Conquest and maintained as an integral part of the
language; though the process of borrowing from French has been also
active since the epoch of the Conquest: such are the pairs nude,
naked; pedagogue, schoolmaster; poignant, sharp; peccant,
sinning; sign, token: other familiar instances are tether,
derived from the Celtic at an old date; and loot, adopted from the
Hindi, by the side of plunder. The case is, of course, similar where a
synonym is adopted from another dialect, as vetch by the side of
fitch, vat beside fat (a vessel), etc.
But though such superfluities in language are continually appearing,
they have a constant tendency to disappear on the earliest possible
occasion. Language is a careful housewife, who is constantly
endeavouring to keep nothing on hand but what she can use, and carefully
to retrench the superfluous. We must, of course, never suppose that any
body of speakers combine to admit a word into the common language which
they employ, and that then, finding that the word or form has its
meaning already expressed in their language and is therefore
unnecessary, they proceed to discard it. These new words and forms
proceed in each instance from individuals, who overlook the existence in
their own language of a term already in use for some meaning which they
need to express, and so introduce a new form: this is then employed by
others, who, hearing the new form and the old, employ both alike
indiscriminately. Superfluity in language, then, must be regarded as
spontaneously arising, and without the aid of any voluntary impulse on
the part of any individual or individuals. The language of common life
is, as might be expected, most ready in freeing the vehicle of ordinary
communication from superfluities, and in the differentiation of
synonyms. The language of poetry and, in a less degree, of written
prose, demands a store of synonyms, on which an author may draw at will,
thereby forming an individual style and avoiding monotony. It is as
useful, nay, as indispensable to the poet that he should have a store of
words with similar meanings which he may employ for the purposes of his
artificial style, as it is for the ordinary speaker or writer to have a
distinct shade of meaning attached to each of the synonyms which he
employs. And as poetry makes greater demands upon the taste and powers
of an author than prose, we find that the language of poetry preserves
archaic forms and words which in prose have been practically obsolete.
In fact such words become the stock in trade of all writers of poetry,
appearing, of course, most frequently in those who seek to invest their
work with a peculiarly archaic caste. Thus, the diction of Spenser must
have appeared almost as archaic to his contemporaries as to
ourselves.[135] Poetry will also maintain constructions which have a
tendency in prose to become obsolete: as, meseems; Time prove the
rest. The metaphors employed in old Norse poetry are very instructive
on this head. They have been treated at great length in the ‘Corpus
Poeticum Boreale’ by Vigfusson and York Powell, from whose work[136] we
cite the following instances. The breast is spoken of as the mind’s
house, memory’s sanctuary, the lurking-place of thought, the shore
of the mind, the bark of laughter, the hall of the heart. The eye
is the moon or star of the brows, the light or levin of the
forehead, the cauldron of tears, the pledge of Woden. Herrings are
the arrows of the sea, the darts, the tail-barbed arrows of the
deep. Ships are characterised by a host of metaphors; as, the tree or
beam, the sled, the car, the beam or timber of the sea or waves;
the steeds of the helm, oars, mast, sail, yard: and numerous other
specimens of ‘pars pro toto.’
The most simple and obvious case of retrenchment in language is where,
out of several similar forms and phrases, all disappear and are disused
except a single one; as where to grow is used instead of to wax; to
go, instead of to fare, etc. We must look upon these retrenchments in
language as mainly due to individuals; each speaker expresses himself
more or less unconsciously with a certain consistency, and uses,
generally speaking, what we may properly call his own dialect. It is
owing to such individual influence that the distinctions in language
which we call dialects arise, and thus the different opportunities for
choice form a main source of the distinctions of dialect.
In addition to this negative process of simply dropping what is useless,
there is the positive process of utilising what is superfluous in
language by differentiation of meaning in the case of synonymous words
and phrases. This process is no more the result of conscious purpose
than the other. Since each individual has gradually to learn the
different senses of words, inflections, particles, etc., it is clear
that when there are several synonyms in use--each of which has several
shades of signification--he will almost certainly hear one of them used
in one, and another in another of these meanings. If, for instance, we
represent the full meaning of a word in its different shades by the
letters A + B + C + D, and, similarly, that of its synonym by
a + b + c + d, the probability almost amounts to certainty that
when a learner first hears the former word, the shade of meaning (say
B) in which it happens to be employed will differ from that (say d)
in which he first learns the use of the latter. He will then inevitably,
though perhaps unconsciously, attach by preference these particular
shades of meaning to the two words; and will continue to do so, unless
stronger impulses, such as frequent use in other meanings by surrounding
speakers, force him to discard the differentiation which he has
established. But from the moment when he begins to use, and as long as
he uses the word consistently in one sense, he will influence others in
the same linguistic community, and lay the basis for definite acceptance
of the word in a particular or special sense.
Nor, again, must we assume that a differentiation in sound was purposely
and consciously made by speakers with a view to differentiate meanings.
Cases taken from modern languages may serve to show the unreasonableness
of such assumptions. Especial attention has been paid by writers on
Romance Philology to the ‘doublets’ occurring in their own languages. By
‘doublets’ we mean the double derivative forms of one and the same word
(such as raison, ‘reason,’ and ration, ‘allowance,’ both coming from
rationem): forms commonly appearing in a language at two different
periods in the history of the language, and invested, in spite of their
common origin, with distinct and special senses. The name of ‘doublets’
was first applied to them by Nicolas Catherinot, who, as early as 1683,
published a list of those which he had observed in French, but without
giving the reasons for the phenomenon. How imperfect the philological
knowledge of his day was may be seen from the following specimens of
‘doublets’ which he gives: from BATTUERE, Low Latin for ‘to fight,’ he
derived both battre (to fight) and tuer (to kill): from GRAVIS
(heavy), grave, serious; brave, brave: from MARMOR (marble),
marble, marble; marmot, guinea-pig.[137] A. Brachet has collected
many other specimens in the work cited below: Coelho has made a
collection from the Portuguese in the Romania, II. 281, sqq.[138]
It must, however, be noticed that many of the doublets cited in these
works stand outside of the class of those with which we have to deal,
and such cannot be taken as real cases of differentiation. For instance,
a loan word may immediately upon its introduction have been accepted in
a sense different from that borne by the word of the same origin which
already existed in the language: as in the case of chantée (sung, fem.
past part.) and cantata (cantata, a piece which is sung, as
distinguished from a sonata, a piece which is sounded or played),
borrowed from the Italian by the French; of sexte (term in music and
‘the sixth book’) with its doublet sieste (the hour of rest) borrowed
from the Spanish siesta, both derived from the Latin sextam; of
façon (manner) with its doublet fashion, borrowed from the English,
both from Latin factionem, ‘a making.’ Thus, again, the French
chose (a thing) and cause (a cause) alike owe their origin to the
Latin causam, but the meanings were not differentiated in France:
cause was borrowed as a law-term long after chose had developed into
the general meaning of thing. It is the same, moreover, with such
English doublets as ticket, etiquette: army, armada: orison,
oration: penance, penitence. Such doublets as these, and guitar,
zither, cithara may be called pseudo-doublets, producing as they do
the effect of differentiation, but serving really as labels to
designate a foreign idea or object. Nor, again, must we include cases in
which a word became grammatically isolated and then received a special
meaning; such as where ‘bescheiden,’ in German, is now employed with
the signification of ‘modest,’ while ‘beschieden’ is used as the true
participial form, and never means, or has meant, ‘modest.’ Similarly, in
French, we have savant (a scholar) originally used as synonymous with
present participle sachant (knowing) but in modern French as an
adjective or noun only, whilst sachant has always remained present
participle and no more: amant, the present participle of amare (to
love) is used as a substantive only.[139]
There are, however, other cases in which words are really
differentiated; that is to say, cases in which two words, whose meaning
we know to have been identical, have come to be accepted in different
meanings. This is a genuine process of economy in language. In French
s’attaquer à and s’attacher à at one time were used with identically
the same meaning and employed indifferently. Attaquer is used in the
sense of ‘attacher’ in this line of the fourteenth century--Une riche
escarboucle le mantel ataqua (‘a rich carbuncle attached ( held) the
mantel’) (Bauduin de Sebourc, i. 370). On the other hand, attacher is
used in the sense of ‘to attack:’ as in the following passage, quoted by
M. Brachet[140] from a letter of Calvin to the regent of England,--Tous
ensemble méritent bien d’estre réprimés par le glayve qui vous est
commis, veu qu’ils s’attaschent non seulement au roy, mais à Dieu qui
l’a assis au siège royal,  ‘All together deserve to be put down by the
sword which has been entrusted to you, seeing that they attack not
merely the King, but God who has set him on the royal seat.’ (Lettres de
Calvin recueillies par M. Bonnet, ii. 201). In modern French attacher
is used exclusively in the sense of ‘to attach’ ‘to fasten;’ attaquer
 ‘to attack.’ Another instance is found in chaire and chaise, both
of which words came into French from cathedram, and both of which once
signified the same thing (Theodore Beza, in 1530, complains of the
faulty pronunciation of the Parisians who say chaise instead of
chaire). At the present day, of course, chaise means ‘chair,’ and
chaire is confined to the signification of ‘pulpit’ or ‘professor’s
chair.’ In English, shoal and shallow seem to have been used
synonymously, and to have become differentiated.[141] Other instances
are of, off; naught, not; assay, essay; upset, set up;
Master, Mister (Mr.); Miss, Mistress, Mrs. (pronounced
Missus). In these cases, the differentiation took place within the
given language; and such cases should be carefully distinguished from
those cases in which the differentiation was made outside of the
language. For instance, in squandered and scatter, both of which
seem to have signified the same thing, simply ‘to disperse’; cf.,
squandered abroad (Merchant of Venice, I. iii. 22). Indict and
indite seem to have borne the same meaning, but are now
differentiated.
To these may be added the German doublets reiter (a rider) and
ritter (a knight), which may be paralleled by the use of the English
squire and esquire; of which the latter word has lately come into
use simply as a title of society, whereas both forms were once used as
in Scott’s nine and twenty squires of fame. Other instances are
scheuen, ‘to fear,’ and scheuchen, ‘to scare:’ jungfrau, ‘maiden,’
and jungfer, ‘virgin.’
Double forms arising from the confusion of different methods of
declension are often used in different senses, as in the case of the
Latin locus, whose plurals loca and loci mean ‘places,’ and
‘passages in books’ respectively: the German Franke, the Franconian
franken, ‘a franc’ (9½d.): this difference is utilised, together
with a difference of gender, in the German der lump, ‘the worthless
fellow;’ die lumpe, ‘the rag;’ etc. The difference of gender cannot be
utilised in English, but is thus utilised--in German--in such cases as
DER band, ‘volume;’ DAS band, ‘ribbon:’ DER see, ‘the lake;’ DIE
see, ‘the sea:’ DIE erkenntniss, ‘the act of judging;’ DAS
erkenntniss ‘the judgment:’--in French, UN foudre de guerre, ‘a
thunderbolt of war’ (personified); UNE foudre, ‘a thunderbolt:’ UN
critique, ‘a critic;’ UNE critique, ‘a criticism:’ UN office, ‘a
duty;’ UNE office, ‘a pantry:’ LE mémoire, ‘memorandum;’ LA
mémoire, ‘memory:’ LE politique, ‘politician;’ LA politique,
‘politics:’ LE Bourgogne, ‘Burgundy wine;’ LA Bourgogne, ‘Burgundy:’
LE paille, ‘straw colour;’ LA paille, ‘the straw.’ To these must be
added the cases in which double plural formations are differentiated, as
in English clothes, cloths; brothers, brethren; cows, kine
(poetical); pence, pennies:--in German, Band, ‘bond’ and ‘ribbon;’
Bande, ‘bonds:’ Bänder, ‘ribbons:’ Bank, ‘bench’ and ‘bank;’
Bänke, ‘benches;’ Banken, ‘banks:’ Gesicht, ‘face’ and ‘vision;’
Gesichte, ‘vision;’ Gesichter, ‘faces:’ Laden, ‘shop’ and
‘shutter;’ Läden, ‘shops;’ Laden, ‘shutters:’ etc.[142] In French,
we have l’aïeul, ‘the grandfather;’ les aïeux, ‘ancestors;’ and
aïeuls, ‘grandfathers:’ les travaux, ‘works;’ and les travails, ‘a
minister’s reports:’ l’œil, ‘eye;’ les yeux, ‘eyes;’ and les œils
(small oval windows commonly called œils de bœuf). The singular
appât means ‘bait;’ les appas signifies ‘charms,’ and has a doublet,
les appâts, meaning ‘baits.’ In Russian, the accusative plural is the
same as the nominative in the case of inanimate objects: it is in the
case of animate beings identical with the genitive form. In Dutch, the
plurals in -en and -s are used in the case of some words
indifferently, as vogelen and vogels, ‘birds:’ in the case of some
others, one alone is commonly used, as engelen, ‘angels,’ but
pachters, ‘farmers:’ again, in the case of others, both forms are
used, but with different meanings; thus hemelen, ‘the heavens;’ but
hemels, ‘canopies of a bed:’ letteren, ‘letters,’ or ‘literature;’
letters, ‘letters of the alphabet;’ etc. From the Danish, we may cite
skatte, ‘treasures;’ skatter, ‘taxes;’ vaaben, ‘weapons;’
vaabener, ‘armorial bearings.’ From Italian, we may instance
braccia, ‘the two arms of the body;’ bracci, ‘arms of the sea;’
membra, ‘the members of the body;’ membri, ‘the members of an
association.’ Similarly, in Spanish the neuter of the second declension
takes in many cases a feminine form in the plural; and in Portuguese
this manner of differentiation is more common than in any other European
language: cf. serra, ‘saw,’ ‘mountain ridge;’ serro, ‘a high
mountain;’ etc. In Russian, synovya means ‘descendants’; synui,
‘sons;’ etc. The words (to) purvey and (to) provide have arisen from
the same original form, as have respect and respite; deploy and
display; separate and sever.
The word as, like also, took its rise from the A.S. ealswâ; it is
simply a short form of also; and an intermediate form exists in O.E.
alse and als. In Maundeville, p. 153, we find the two forms used
convertibly: As foule as thei ben, als evele thei ben  so evil
they are; and again, als longe as here vitaylles lasten, thei may
abide there, p. 130.
Than and thanne were used in Chaucer’s time where we should use
then: Now thanne, put thyn hond down at my bak (Chaucer, Cant.
Tales, 7721); and in comparisons then was used where we should employ
than, as: ‘I am greater then (i.e. than) you.’
In German, the word verdorben means ‘spoiled’ in a material sense:
verderbt is employed in a moral sense only. It is the same with
bewegt, ‘moved,’ and bewogen, ‘induced.’ In English we employ aged
mostly as a participle proper, but agèd as an adjective; cf. also
molten and melted.
The words formed with the suffixes -hood, -ness, -dom generally
cover the same ground in English as in Anglo-Saxon. There are, however,
here also, a few cases in which differentiation seems to have set in.
Such are hardihood and hardiness; humble-hede, humble-ness,
humility: young-hede, youth. In German, kleinheit and neuheit
were used convertibly with kleinigkeit and neuigkeit: now the former
 smallness, newness, the latter  trifle, novelty.
In the case of adjectives, we may see the same process in mobile,
movable: and in German, in ernstlich and ernsthaft which were once
used convertibly, but are now differentiated.
Sometimes a word originally of a different meaning encroaches on the
domain of another word, and gradually arrogates the latter’s meaning to
itself. Thus, in French, the meaning of en, the form taken in French
for the Latin in, has been encroached upon by the preposition à, and
by the adverb dans (O.Fr. denz  de intus), and dans has
completely ousted the prepositional meaning of dedans. Molière could
still write dedans ma poche  ‘in my pocket.’ Böse, in German, is
now almost restricted to the sense of ‘morally bad’ by the encroachments
of schlecht (originally ‘smooth,’ ‘straight’) English slight. The
English word sick, once the general word for ill, has been
restricted in meaning by the encroachments of the latter word.
Sometimes a newly formed word encroaches on the domain of meaning
covered by a word in existence, as to utilise on to use;
serviceable upon useful; gentlemanly upon genteel and gentle;
magnificence on munificence:[143] mainly is encroached upon by
chiefly, pursuer by persecutor and prosecutor: and sometimes it
practically ousts it from its previous meaning, as in the case of
methodist, naturalist, purist, etc.
The above examples may serve to show us some of the main factors in the
differentiation of meaning, and with how little conscious design on the
part of the speakers they were carried out.
The divisions into which grammarians have distributed words, such as
gender, number, and, in the case of verbs, voice and tense, are based
upon the function which each word discharges in the sentence. Now, these
functional differences rest ultimately upon psychological categories:
that is to say, upon differences which depend upon the view taken by our
mind of the natural grouping and classification of ideas. In other
words, the divisions formed by grammarians depend ultimately upon the
classification of the relations in which the ideas suggested by words
stand to each other, as it appears to our imagination. Grammatical
classification was, in fact, originally nothing but an attempt to
express and group the order and connection of ideas as they were
conceived of by the human mind. Immediately that this influence of
imagination has made itself felt in the usage of language, it becomes a
grammatical factor: and the groups which it forms become grammatical
categories. But the action of the psychological category does not cease
when it has thus produced the grammatical; and the difference between
the two kinds is that, whereas the grammatical categories become, so to
speak, stereotyped and fixed, those created by the imagination are ever
changing; just as the human mind itself is ever changing its ideas.
Besides this, changes in sound-groups are always occurring, and are
constantly operating to prevent the grammatical categories coinciding
with the psychological. Then, as a tendency makes itself felt to bring
about a coincidence of the two categories, the grammatical category
suffers a displacement, whence arise what we are accustomed to call
grammatical irregularities. A consideration of the way in which these
irregularities arise may help us to understand the origin of the
grammatical categories, to which we now proceed.
The foundation of grammatical gender is the natural distinction between
the sexes in mankind and animals. Fancy may endow other objects or
qualities with sex; but sex, whether fanciful or real, has no proper
connection with grammar. The truth of this may be well seen from the
English language, in which we have in most cases discarded the use of
grammatical gender. In order, therefore, to study the conditions of
gender, we have to turn to languages more highly inflected than English.
The test whereby we now recognise the grammatical gender of a
substantive is the concord existing between the substantive and its
attribute and predicate, or between it and a pronoun representing
it--Domus nigra est, ‘The house is black;’ Domus quam vidi, ‘The
house which I saw;’ It is the moon; I ken her horn (Burns); etc. The
rise, therefore, of grammatical gender is closely connected with the
appearance of a variable adjective and pronoun. One theory to explain
this is, that the difference in form, before it yet marked the gender,
had become attached to a particular stem-ending: as if, e.g., all
stems ending in n- admitted the ending -us--as bonus, ‘good,’--and
all those in g- the ending -ra--as nigra, ‘black;’--and that the
ending may have been an independent word which, while yet independent,
had acquired a reference to a male or female.[144] Gender appears in
English, in the first place, as an artificial and often arbitrary
personification, as when the sun and moon are spoken of as he and
she respectively, under the influence of the ideas attaching to Sol
and Luna: Phœbus and Diana, etc.: and, again, as an expression of
interest in objects or animals, it frequently occurs in the language of
the people and of children; though it sometimes enters into the language
of common life, as when a dog is referred to as he and a cat as she,
in cases where sex is not spoken of. (See Storm, die lebende Sprache, p.
418.)
In the pronoun, as in the adjective, the distinction of gender may
appear in the stem-ending: as ‘une’ (‘one,’ ‘a’); ‘quæ,’ (‘which’).
It may, however, also be expressed by distinct roots, such as er,
sie; he and she. It is, indeed, probably in substantive pronouns
that grammatical gender was first developed, as in fact it has longest
maintained itself; as in English, where, in adjectives and nouns, it has
almost entirely disappeared.
Grammatical gender probably corresponded originally to natural sex.
Exceptions to this rule must gradually have come about, partly through
changes of meaning setting in,--as where a word is used metaphorically,
like love (neuter, abstract), love (masc. or fem.--‘the beloved
object’); or where it has ‘occasionally’ modified its meaning, like Fr.
le guide, strictly ‘the guidance,’ and so used in Old French; your
fatherhoods (Ben Jonson). Consequently we find natural sex again
influencing the genders as fixed by grammar. Thus, in German, Die
hässlichste meiner kammermädchen  ‘the ugliest of my chambermaids’
(Wieland), where the article die is of the feminine gender, though the
word kammermädchen, being a diminutive in chen is, like all others
of that class, neuter. In French, we have UNE (fem.) brave enfant, ‘a
brave girl.’ The word gens, again, is, properly speaking, feminine,
like the word la gent, which still survives in the restricted sense of
‘a race:’ but in combinations like ‘tous les braves gens’ (‘all worthy
people’) the grammatical gender is neglected; and this neglect is
fostered by the use of such a word as braves, which in form might
apply to either sex. On the other hand, in combinations like ‘les
bonnes gens,’ (‘good people’), where an adjective with a specifically
feminine termination is joined to the substantive, the grammatical
gender maintains itself. Cf., also, instances like ‘un enseigne’ (‘an
ensign’), ‘un trompette’ (‘a trumpeter’); and, in Provençal, ‘lo
poestat,’ for ‘the magistrate’ (‘il podestà’). In Latin and Greek,
these so-called violations of the concord in gender are very common; we
are familiar with them as constructions πρός σύνεσιν, i.e. according to
the sense; cf. Thracum auxilia (neuter) ... cæsi (masc.) (Tac.,
Ann., iv. 48), ‘The Thracian auxiliaries were killed;’ Capita (neut.)
conjurationis virgis cæsi (masc.) ac securi percussi (masc.) (Livy,
x. 1), ‘The heads of the conspiracy were slain and their heads cut off;’
Septem millia (neut.) hominum in naves impositos (masc.) (Livy, xl.
41), ‘Seven thousand men put on board ships;’ Hi (masc.) summo in
fluctu pendent ... tres Notus abreptas (i.e. naves--fem.) in saxa
latentia torquet (Vergil, Æn., i. 106-8), ‘Some (of the ships) hang on
the crest of the waves ...; three, swept away, the South wind whirls
upon hidden rocks.’ In Greek, ὦ φίλτατ’, ὦ περισσὰ τιμηθεὶς (masc.)
τεκνον (neut.) (Eur., Tro. 735), ‘O dearest, O much honoured child;’ τὰ
τέλη (neut.) καταβάντας (masc.) (Thuc., IV. xv. 1), ‘The magistrates
having descended:’ and similar instances frequently in Thucydides.
We next find cases where the grammatical gender has completely changed.
Thus, in Greek, masculine designations of persons and animals are turned
into feminines by simply referring them to female objects: thus, we have
either ὁ or ἡ ἄγγελος (‘messenger’), διδάσκαλος (‘teacher’), ἰατρός,
(‘healer’), τύραννος (‘ruler’), ἔλαφος (‘deer’), ἵππος (‘horse’ or
‘mare’), etc. In Christian times, a form ὁ παρθένος (‘an unmarried man’)
was constructed (Apocal., xiv. 4), translated into Italian by Vergine.
Neuter diminutives in German readily become masculine or feminine when
the diminutive meaning has been obscured: as, e.g., the occasional
construction die Fräulein, ‘the young lady;’ cf., also, in Latin,
Glycerium mea, Philematium mea (Plaut., Most., I. iii. 96), mea
Gymnasium (Plaut., Cist., I. i. 2). In English, there are a great
number of words which would, in the first instance, be thought of as
masculines, as containing a suffix commonly associated with masculine
words. These are, however, very frequently used as feminines; and, in
some cases, even when a feminine termination exists side by side with
the masculine one--as, She is heir of Naples (Shakespeare, Tempest,
II. i.): others are enemy, rival, novice, astronomer, beggar,
teacher, botanist, etc. Cf. she is a peasant (Longfellow); The
slave loves her master (Lord Byron); His only heir a princess (Temp.,
I. 2); She is his only heir (Much Ado, I. i.); The daughter and heir
of Leonato (ibid., I. iii.); She alone is heir to both of us (ibid.,
V. i.); etc.
If collectives or descriptions of qualities become descriptions of
persons, the result may be a change of gender. The Fr. le garde (‘the
watchman’) was once identical with la garde (‘the watch,’ vigiliæ);
cf. further, in Spanish, el cura (‘the priest’), el justicia (‘the
magistrate’): the Old Bulgarian junota (‘youth’), as a masculine,
means ‘a youth.’ The Russian Golova means ‘a head,’ and, in the
masculine, ‘a conductor.’ Portuguese furnishes numerous instances of
this; as, a bolsa (fem.), ‘the purse,’ ‘exchange;’ o bolsa (masc.),
‘the treasurer:’ a corneta, ‘the cornet;’ o corneta, ‘the
trumpeter:’ a lingua, ‘the tongue;’ o lingua, ‘the interpreter:’
etc.[145] In Italian, podestà (‘magistrate’) is an instance of this.
Feminine surnames, again, are frequently added to masculine personal
names: cf. Latin Alauda, Capella, Stella; Ital. Colonna, Rosa,
Barbarossa, Malespina, etc. So, in French, we find names like Jean
Marie.
A word often takes a particular gender from the fact that it belongs to
a particular category. The gender of the type of the species, in fact,
fixes the gender for other members classed with it. Thus, in English,
the word for beast comes from the O.Fr. beste (bête), which is
feminine: but this word, and the names of beasts generally, are treated
in poetry as masculines, because the Teutonic usage is to treat beasts
generally as masculine. Cf. The beast is laid down in his lair
(Cowper); And when a beste is deed he ne hath no peyne (Chaucer, Cant.
Tales, 1321); The forest’s leaping panther shall hide his spotted hide
(Bryant). Numerous other instances are given by Mätzner.[146] It is
probable that personification aids in fixing the gender in these cases.
Similarly, in French, été (‘summer’), from æstatem, has become
masculine because the other seasons of the year were masculine. Minuit
(‘midnight’) has followed midi (‘midday’); val (‘valley’) has
followed mont (‘mountain’), font (‘fount’) fontaine (‘fountain’);
aigle (‘eagle’) is masculine because oiseau (‘bird’) is masculine;
brebis (‘wether’) is feminine because ovis (‘sheep’) is feminine;
sort (‘lot’) is masculine because bonheur (‘happiness’) is
masculine; art (‘art’) is masculine because métier (‘profession’) is
masculine: mer (‘sea’) is feminine because terra (‘land’) is
feminine. In German, again, the names of Tiber and Rhone have
followed the model of most German river names, and appear as feminine.
In Greek, many names of plants and trees have become feminine, following
the model of δρῦς (‘tree’) and βοτάνη (‘grass’); cf. ὁ κύανος (‘steel’),
ἡ κύανος (‘the corn-flower’), so called from a fancied resemblance
between the plant and the metal. Towns, again, in Greek, show an
inclination to follow the gender of πόλις, ‘a city:’ cf. ἡ Κέραμος, from
ὁ κέραμος, ‘clay;’ ἡ Κισσός, from ὁ κισσός, ‘ivy;’ ἡ Μάραθος, from ὁ
μόραθος, ‘fennel.’
In other cases formal reasons have brought about a change in gender.
We have a striking example of this in the feminine gender assumed by
abstract nouns in -or in the Romance languages, to which flos
(‘flower’) has also added itself. The fact was felt that most abstract
substantives were feminine, e.g. those terminating in -tas, -tus,
-tudo, -tio, -itia, -ia; and, especially, the feminine
termination -ura sometimes was employed as an alternative to -or;
cf. pavor (‘fear’), Ital. paura. Again, in Latin, words in -a,
when these were not, like poeta, the names of males, were commonly
feminine. Consequently, we find that Greek neuters in -μα appear in
popular Latin as feminines, a gender which they have in many cases
preserved in the Romance languages. Examples of this are seen in
schème, dogme, diademe, anagramme, énigme, épigramme, etc.
In the same way, in Modern Greek, the old Greek feminines in ος have in
many cases became masculine, as ὁ πλάτανος, ὁ κυπάρισσος, ‘the plain,’
‘the cypress.’
Sometimes the termination appears altered to suit the gender; thus the
Lat. socrus (‘a father-in-law’) produces the Spanish word suegra (‘a
mother-in-law’): and, again, sometimes the traditional was the natural
gender; and this was an additional reason why the word should alter its
termination, instead of being modified by the gender,--thus, in Greek,
the α stems which have become masculine, like νεανίας
(‘a youth’), have adopted the characteristic s of the masculine
nominative.
The way in which natural gender, as viewed by imagination, has affected
grammatical gender may be well seen in English. The personal pronouns
give the only real traces of grammatical gender left in English, he,
she, it; his, her, its, etc. On the other hand, substantives
are very commonly referred to one sex or another by writers, and to some
extent personified. In these cases sometimes a faint tradition of their
Anglo-Saxon gender seems to have lingered, as when, for instance,
mammals and reptiles are in poetry spoken of as masculine; e.g., Like
the roe (A.S. rá, fem.) when he hears (Longfellow); I have seen
the hyena’s (Lat. and Fr. fem.) eyes of flame, and heard at my side
his stealthy tread (Bryant). Birds, on the other hand, are treated very
often as feminines, irrespective of the grammatical gender possessed by
their Anglo-Saxon or French original; cf. But the sea-fowl has gone to
her nest (Cowper); A bird betrays her nest by striving to conceal it
(Byron); Jealous as the eagle of her high aiery (ibid.); The raven
flaps her wing (ibid.); A hawk hits her prey (Halliwell, s.v. ruff);
The swan rows her state (Milton).
We must mention one more point which ought not to be overlooked, though,
owing to the scanty survival of grammatical gender in modern English, it
cannot easily be illustrated by English examples. We have indicated some
of the causes which have been active in producing a change of gender;
but, besides these, there is a negative one, viz., the absence of
impediment to such change, which, in a certain sense, may be said to
have contributed to the same effect. The distinction in gender which is
even yet marked in French and German by the different forms of the
singular article (le, der, masc.; la, die, fem.; das, neut.)
has long since disappeared in the plural. We find les, die for all
genders. And hence it is clear that such words as were most frequently
used in the plural were least closely associated with a particular
gender, and were therefore more especially amenable to the influence of
any force tending to group them with words of a gender different from
their own. For instance, most feminine nouns in German form their plural
by adding -en to the singular, while few masculine and only six or
seven neuter nouns do the like; as a result of which many nouns,
formerly masculine, are now feminine, and this especially applies to
cases where the plural was in frequent use.
The neuter, the sexless, owes its origin as a grammatical category
merely to the development and differentiation of the two other genders.
As in the case of gender, so, before number passed into a grammatical
category, concord must have been developed. Even in languages which,
like English, would naturally express the plural by some plural
termination, we find words denoting a plurality, and, indeed, a definite
number, conceived and spoken of as a unity. Such are a pair, a
leash, a brace, a triplet, a trio, a quartette, a dozen, a
score.
We find similar cases in the most varied languages: cf. the Fr. une
dizaine (‘a collection of ten’), une douzaine (‘a dozen’), centaine
(‘a collection of a hundred’), etc.; Ital. una diecina, dozzina,
etc.; trave, in Danish, means ‘a score of corn sheaves;’ schock,
in German, means ‘sixty;’ tchetvero, in Russian, means ‘a set of
four.’ We may add, the curious Latin word quimatus, ‘the age of five
years.’
Thus, in like manner, so-called collective nouns are simply
comprehensive singular designations of plurality. Now, the speaker or
writer may choose to think of the collective of which he is speaking as
a unity or as a plurality, and the way in which he chooses to regard it
may affect the concord; nay, it may even affect the gender.
The most common case is where a plural verb follows a singular
collective noun: as, ‘The whole nation seem to be running out of their
wits’ (Smollett, Humphrey Clinker); ‘The army of the Queen mean to
besiege us’ (Shakespeare, 3 Hen. VI., I. ii.);[147] cf. ‘Even until King
Arthur’s table, man by man, had fallen in Lyonness about their Lord’
(Tennyson, Idylls of the King); ‘Pars perexigua, duce amisso, Romam
inermes delati sunt’ (Livy, ii. 14)  ‘A very small part, their
leader lost, were brought unarmed to Rome;’ ‘Cetera classis,
prætoria nave amissa, fugerunt’ (Livy, xxxv. 26)  ‘The rest of the
fleet, with the loss of the prætorian ship, fled (plur.).’ Sometimes
there is a mixture of singular and plural, e.g. ‘Fremit improba plebes
(sing.) Sontibus accensæ (plur.) stimulis’ (Stat., Theb., v. 488) 
‘The impatient people murmur (sing.), inflamed (plur. part.) etc.:’
cf. the following examples from the Greek--Μέρος τι (sing.) ανθρώπων οὐκ
ἡγοῦνται (plur.) θεούς (Plato., Leg., 948)  ‘A portion of mankind do
not believe in gods;’ Τό στράτευμα ἐπορίζετο (sing.) σῖτον, κόπτοντες
(plur.) τοὺς βοῦς καὶ ονους (Xen., Anab., II. i. 6)  ‘The army provided
itself with food (by) cutting up (plur. part.) the oxen and asses.’
In A.S., when ðæt or ðis is connected with a plural predicate by
means of the verb ‘to be,’ the verb is put in the plural: ‘Eall ðæt
sindon micle and egeslice dæda’ (‘All that are great and terrible
deeds.’) Conversely, where we should say ‘each of those who hear,’ the
idiom in Anglo-Saxon was to say ‘each of those who hears:’ as, ‘Ælc
ðára ðe ðás míne word gehyrð’ ( ‘Each of those who hears these my
words’, where the verb is made to agree, not with ðara ðe, but with
ælc. Cf. Sweet, Anglo-Saxon Reader, p. xci.).
We find many words so commonly combined with the plural, that we more
naturally apprehend them as plural than as singular; such a word is the
English ‘people,’ which we instinctively connect with a plural verb. In
such cases, we sometimes even find that the grammatical form actually
assimilates itself to the psychological number, as when we speak of
folks; cf. also sheeps in Shakespeare (Love’s Labour’s lost, II.
i.); while from the French word gent, which was used in Old French
with the plural, we find formed, in the same way, the word gens: in
Italian we find genti beside gente. In Anglo-Saxon, -waru denotes
‘a nation,’ ‘a defence:’ the plural -ware, ‘citizens;’ as Rómware,
‘the men of Rome;’ Cantwáre, ‘the men of Kent,’ etc. In Gothic, there
is a collective neuter fadrein, which we may illustrate or parallel,
though not exactly translate, by the word ‘fathership.’ In the singular
(genitive) it is used in the meaning of ‘race’ or ‘family’ (Eph. iii.
15), thus showing its original abstract and then collective sense; and
again it is found (Luke viii. 56) still singular but with a plural verb:
jah usgeisnodedun fadrein izos  and were-astonished fathership
(i.e. PARENTS) her  and her parents were astonished. We even find
the singular noun with the article (i.e. demonstrative pronoun) in
the plural: Andhofun ðan im ðai fadrein is jah qeðun  Answered then
to him those fathership his and said  Then answered his parents and
said (John ix. 20). It is, thus, this plural meaning which caused the
word to be used in the plural form, exactly as we use folks quoted
above, while the etymological meaning as abstract collective was
overlooked. For example: Ni auk skulun barna FADREINAM huzdjan, ak
FADREINA barnam  not eke shall bairns for FATHERSHIPS hoard, but
FATHERSHIPS for bairns, i.e. For the children shall not hoard for the
parents, but the parents for the children (2 Cor. xii. 14).[148]
The converse of this also happens. A plural expression receives the
function of a singular when the parts thus indicated are thought of as
a whole. Thus we can talk of another sixpence, another hundred
yards; or even use phrases like There’s not another two such women
(Warren); this seven year (Shakes., Much Ado, III. 3.); What is six
winters? (Rich. II., I. iii.). Amends, gallows, sessions,
shambles are plurals, but are generally treated as singulars; e.g., a
shrewd unhappy gallows (Love’s Labour’s lost, V. ii. 12). So, too,
works, scales, etc.: e.g., that crystal scales (Rom. and Jul., I.
ii. 101); Stoppage of a large steelworks (Weekly Times and Echo,
August 19, 1888); Fire in a Liverpool chemical works (Liverpool Daily
Post, June 30, 1884, p. 7); This is good news; etc. Finally, such
plurals become singular, not only in sense, but even in form, and are
treated and declined as such. Thus, in English, we talk of an invoice
(Fr. envois, plur.). In Latin, castra (plur.) sometimes formed a
genitive of singular form, castræ:[149] the plural litteræ, in sense
of ‘an epistle,’ has passed into the French lettre as singular, with a
new plural, lettres; the Latin plural vela, ‘sails,’ into French
une voile: minaciæ has become the French menace, ‘threat,’ and the
Italian minaccia: nuptiæ, ‘nuptials,’ has become, in French, noce,
‘a wedding,’ as well as noces: tenebræ, ‘darkness’ has become, in
Spanish, tiniebla, as well as tinieblas; deliciæ, ‘delights,’ in
French, délice, as well as délices. Pâques, ‘Easter,’ Athènes,
‘Athens,’ are used as singulars.
Pronouns referring to abstract expressions stand sometimes in the
plural; as, Nobody knows what it is to lose a friend till THEY have
lost him (Fielding). Again, the predicate may stand in the plural;[150]
as, Quisque suos PATIMUR manes (Verg., Æn., 743)--‘We each suffer
our own ghostly punishment,’ where quisque ‘each’ in singular, but
the verb patimur is plural. Similar are uterque educunt (Cæs., C.,
iii. 30); uter ERATIS (Plaut., Men., 1119); neuter ad me IRETIS;
Every one of these letters ARE in my name (Shakespeare, Twelfth
Night, II. v.); Neither of them ARE remarkable (Blair); Every one
to rest THEMSELVES BETAKE (Rape of Lucrece, 125); when neither ARE
alive (Cymb., IV. ii. 252). Most Indo-European languages possess pairs
of pronouns, in each of which sets one properly denotes the singular,
the other plurality; as in English all, every; or each, and any:
and these are readily interchanged; e.g., without all doubt (Shakes.,
Hen. VIII., IV. i. 113), less attemptable than any the rarest of our
ladies (Cymb., I. iv. 65). Thus, even in Latin, the singular omnis is
used where we should have expected omnes; as, militat omnis amans
(Ovid, Amor., I. ix. 1). Tu pulses omne quod obstat (Hor., Sat. II.,
vi. 30). Thus totus has passed into the French tout, ‘all.’ We find
both in Shakespeare, connected with the singular; Both our remedies
within thy help and holy physic lies, i.e. the remedy for us both
(Rom. and Jul., II. iii. 51). Thus, also, autrui, ‘others,’ in French,
really the oblique case of autre, is in fact a singular, but is looked
upon as a plural; as, la rigueur envers autrui (Massillon).
Number, in the sense of singular or plural, cannot, again, be properly
predicated of the simple names of materials. We do not think of them as
individuals, except in connection with form as well as matter,--in fact,
till we think of substances as divided as well as divisible. Hence it is
that the names of materials occur mostly in the singular number; the
fact being that if there were a neuter number, i.e. a grammatical form
expressive of neither plural nor singular, we should naturally employ
it.
But the name of a material is readily used as that of an individual
object, and, on the other hand, the name of an individual object may
easily come to be the designation of a material. The imagination
supplies or withdraws, as it may be, the form and definite shape which,
as we have seen, is essential to number. Take such instances as hair,
grass, bloom, fruit, weed, grain, cloth, stone, wood,
field, meadow, marsh, heath, earth, land, bread, cake,
etc. Similarly, when we talk of fowl as a viand, we individualise and
give form to a general conception; as, in French, when we talk about du
porc, du mouton. In the same way, we have in Latin such expressions
as leporem et gallinam et anserem for ‘the flesh of the hare, the
fowl, and the goose;’ and fagum atque abietem for ‘the beech tree and
the fir-tree’ (Cæsar, Bell. Gall., v. 12). In the same way, we must
explain the singular in cases like The enemy is approaching; The
Russian is within hail. Similarly, Livy uses the singular, as Romanus
for ‘the Romans,’ Poenus for ‘the Carthaginians,’ eques for ‘the
cavalry,’ pedes for ‘the infantry,’ etc.; nay, he even goes as far as
to combine Hispani milites et funditor Balearis (xxvii. 2).
Thus, too, Horace ventures on the combination miles nautæque (Sat. I.,
i.). Vergil has plurima mortis imago, ‘many an image of death’ (Æn.,
ii. 369); in Seneca, we even find multo hoste, ‘many an enemy.’
In German, the singular of many words stands constantly after numerals;
as, tausend mann, ‘a thousand men,’ zehn stück Pferde, ‘ten head
(lit. pieces) of horses.’ Similarly it was usual to write in English
such expressions as many score thousand: twenty score paces.[151]
The fact is, that there is no need for any special designation of
plurality to follow a number; the plurality is already sufficiently
denoted by the number itself.[152] We thus see that the form taken by
such a word would naturally be numberless, or absolute, in fact,
would be treated in the same way as it would have been treated before
the rise of grammatical number.
It is the function of the various ‘tenses’ to express the temporal
relation of an event, when considered with regard to a certain moment.
At the outset, however, we must observe that the tenses actually
existing in any given language do not by any means perfectly correspond
to the varieties possible and logically distinguishable in these
relations. We will first consider what would be indispensable to a
logically complete system.
Any event whatever must necessarily be anterior, contemporary, or
posterior, to the moment with respect to which it is considered; and
this moment must itself be past, present, or future. Hence, according as
the moment of comparison is varied, we get the following sets:--
I. Moment of comparison PRESENT.
  The event is stated as--
    (a{1}) NOW past.
    (b_{1}) NOW present.
    (c_{1}) NOW still to come.
II. Moment of comparison PAST.
  The event is stated to have been--
    (a_{2}) THEN already past.
    (b_{2}) THEN present.
    (c_{2}) THEN still to come.
III. Moment of comparison FUTURE.
  It is stated that the event--
    (a_{3}) will THEN be past.
    (b_{3}) will THEN be present.
    (c_{3}) will THEN be still to come.
The above nine subdivisions exhaust all possibilities as long as we
employ but a single ‘moment of comparison’ in each case; and it is so
important that this point should be fully realised, that, simple as it
appears, we proceed to illustrate each division as follows:--
    (a_{1}) Cæsar once said, ‘Veni, vidi, vici.’
    (b_{1}) I now believe that this is true.
    (c_{1}) I expect that he will come.
    (a_{2}) When I entered, he had gone.
    (b_{2}) When I entered, he was speaking.
    (c_{2}) When I entered, he was going to speak.
    (a_{3}) On New Year’s day I shall have completed my fiftieth year.
    (b_{3}) I shall then receive a letter.
    (c_{3}) I shall then be going to write.
It is at once apparent here that in some of these cases we are forced to
have recourse to periphrasis, and that in some we use tenses which might
also serve in other divisions. This, for instance, may be seen by
comparing b_{2} and a_{1}, or, at any rate, c_{1} and c_{3}. But
before discussing these points we must pay a little more attention to
the above scheme, not, indeed, as it actually exists, but as it might
conceivably exist.
It is by no means inconceivable, and quite in accordance with logic,
that we should wish to employ two moments of comparison instead of
one, especially in some of the cases falling under II. and III. In
c_{2}, for instance, the event might be then still to come, but
now (α) past, (β) present, (γ) even yet to
come.
This at first seems fanciful; but while the example we employed to
illustrate c_{2} does not necessarily convey as much, still most
hearers would naturally interpret it as follows: “When I entered, his
speaking was still in the future, but now (unless some hindrance, as yet
unstated, has intervened) it belongs to the past.” Again, if, on the
other hand, we take a sentence like He has promised to do so; in the
first place, it is found to STATE that the promise was given in the
past, when as yet the action of fulfilment belonged to the future; and,
secondly, to IMPLY that this action of fulfilment belongs to the future
still.
Further, it is logically possible, and often necessary, to make a
statement about some event without any reference to time; when, for
instance, a statement is true at any time, or at no time at all. The
form employed in such cases ought, in strict agreement with our
definition of ‘tense,’ to be called ‘tenseless’ or ‘absolute;’ but it is
well known that, in English and all Indo-European languages, the
‘present’ is the tense employed. In Man is mortal the copula is
cannot justly be called ‘present’ tense, for the statement is wholly
abstract, and applies equally to past, present, and future; yet it is
customary and convenient to apply the term ‘present’ even to the word
is as thus used.
This use of the present sometimes gives rise to a certain ambiguity. If,
in speaking of a child, we say He is very troublesome, the statement
may mean He is at this moment very troublesome, in which case the verb
is is present tense proper; or it may mean He is a troublesome
child, whence the sentence becomes abstract-concrete[153] and the
verb is tense absolute.
If, as in the case of grammatical gender and number, these distinctions
of form are to be regarded as later developments in the case of the
grammatical tenses of the verb, we must assume (i.) that the same form
must once have served indifferently for all tense relations, and (ii.)
expect that the tenses actually differentiated will (a) correspond
only incompletely with the scheme of logical distinctions, (b) will in
various languages show various deviations from the ideal scheme, and
(c) will, in the same language at different periods of its history,
show similar variations in those deviations.
i. Though the conclusion under head i. is actually inevitable, it seems,
at first sight, improbable and doubtful; but, in addition to the use of
the present tense discussed and exemplified above, there is much in
modern English which may help to illustrate and enable us to realise it,
while older languages afford much more material for the same purpose. A
usage closely akin to that of the present tense for tense absolute
occurs when the present is used for the future, and more especially
when some other word in the sentence definitely refers the event to the
future. Thus, in I am going to London to-morrow, we actually employ
that specially English periphrasis which is never used in the absolute
sense, but, as a rule, emphatically expresses that the action belongs to
the present time.[154] Nay, where circumstances are sufficiently
unequivocal to absolutely preclude the meaning of the present tense, the
addition of such words as to-morrow, etc., is not even needed. If two
friends, for instance, were speaking about some coming holidays, and the
one had said, I think I will go to Wales, the other might answer, I
don’t care for Wales, I am going to London; or, again, without such
explanatory circumstances, or any special words, the present in a
subordinate clause can stand for a future event, provided that the
main clause grammatically expresses the future; e.g., I will call you
when he comes.
where the event is equally true of the past as of the present; e.g., I
know that  I know it, and knew it some time ago--a case in which the
present tense expresses past AND present together: or (b) where the
event belongs, indeed, entirely to the past, but the result is
represented as actually present. Of (b) these are instances: ‘Master
sends me to tell you,’ ‘He tells me that he is going away,’ ‘I
hear he is better now.’ This usage approaches closely to a third
(c), the so-called Historic present, which, however, we should
probably not consider as a present tense expressing the past, but as a
simple present, whose use is due to the vivid imagination of the
speaker, when it leads him to regard the past as actually present.
We have said that the consciousness of the result of an action sometimes
causes the use of a present tense for a past event. The same cause may
also lead to an exactly opposite usage, viz., that of a past tense for
an event in the present. Thus, as the result of seeing is knowing,
it came to pass that a form originally signifying I have seen acquired
the meaning I know; the Ger. Ich weisz means ‘I know,’ but is
derived from the same root as the Lat. Video, ‘I see.’ Thus, again,
the root which we find in Lat. gno-sco ( I begin to learn, I get
to know) appears in the English I can, which, exactly as the Lat.
novi (for *gnovi, cf. agnovi for ad-gnovi), meant I have got to
know ( I know), has developed its present meaning, I am able, from
one expressive of something like I have become able, or I have
learned. It is thus that arose the so-called ‘præterito-presentia,’
can, must, will, shall, etc., which still betray, one and all,
their origin from a former grammatical past tense, by absence of s as
a characteristic termination of the third person singular--a termination
which we add to the stem in the case of all other present tenses.
Logically, the relation between some tenses of the same verb, as,
express the result, is identical with that between many sets of verbs.
In fact we might translate cognosco by I LEARN, and novi by I KNOW.
Similar sets are to step, to stand; to fall, to lie; etc. But
here, again, this distinction need not to be expressed, or, at least, is
not always expressed; the same form may serve for both. Not to refer to
dead languages or obsolete forms, it is sufficient to quote the
well-known schoolboy’s expression, He stood him on the form, for He
made him stand on the form. So, also, He stood the candle on the
floor (Dickens).[155]
Now, all this confusion of past for present, present for past, effect
for cause, cause for effect, present for future, present for every
relation, causes in practice, as we have already seen, little or no
ambiguity. If we remember this, it becomes easy for us to realize how
conversation and intelligible statement may once have been quite
possible without further aid than that afforded by what we call the
tense absolute, i.e. a form of the verb expressive of the action only,
without any indication of its time. A glance at a tense system very
different from our own, will enable us to do this even more fully, and
at the same time will to some extent illustrate our statement that, in
different languages, the actually existing tenses correspond variously
with the logical scheme. In Hebrew, the verb has three different forms,
called respectively (a) imperative, (b) perfect, (c) imperfect;
which terms, however, might be replaced for the occasion by (a)
command tense, (b) finished tense, (c) unfinished tense, lest
they should mislead readers who have not studied Hebrew. Instead of
‘tense,’ we might as correctly call them ‘moods.’
The context is the sole guide as to whether the event spoken of belongs
to past, present, or future. In narrative, the perfect and imperfect
serve very much the same purposes as the tenses similarly named in
Latin; but the imperfect, as tense or mood of unfinished action,
serves also for our present and future, while a future which is to
represent something as certainly expected, is supplied by the
perfect or finished tense. Again, the imperfect serves for the
optative (wish mood), and also sometimes replaces the imperative,
since the latter is essentially a mood of action as yet unperformed. In
this latter use of the imperfect there is sometimes a slight
differentiation of form.
ii. a. The fact that the grammatical tenses correspond very
incompletely with the logical distinctions, has already been very fully
illustrated by all we have said in this chapter, and it only remains to
add a few words on what are termed in our grammars ‘the compound
tenses.’ Strictly speaking, these are not tenses at all of the verbs to
which they are said to belong: of tenses, i.e. forms derived from the
verb itself, and expressive of definite relations of time, there are but
two in English--the present, and the past or imperfect. The enumeration
of the so-called compound tenses amongst the tenses proper is due to a
confusion between logic and grammar, only slightly removed from the
fiction which gave us the still lingering potential mood (I can
write), or which might with equal correctness have given us an
obligatory mood (I must write), a desiderative mood (I like to
write), an obstinate mood (I am determined to write), etc., etc. In
English we now employ various periphrases for all relations but the
present and that indicated by the imperfect; and the line which
separates a ‘future tense’ I will write, from a phrase like I have
the intention of writing, is a perfectly arbitrary one.
ii. b. Our short and necessarily very incomplete discussion of the
Hebrew tenses furnished an instance of what we stated under ii. b, p.
256; and there is no need to further illustrate this, especially as any
reader acquainted with a foreign language knows how much care is
requisite in translating the various English tenses in their different
applications. Any student of, say, French or German will recognise this;
while, in the case of those who know English alone, no amount of
illustration of the point in question could raise their knowledge above
mere acceptance on authority, or belief at second hand.
To illustrate ii. c, we shall only give a few instances of (α) the use
in English (Modern English and Anglo-Saxon) of a present tense where we
should now employ a future (which latter was then, as now, non-existent
as a tense, the only difference being that the present periphrasis had
not then yet become customary), and of (β) the use of a simple past
tense where we should now employ the plu-perfect:--
α. Æfter ðrím dagon ic áríse  ‘After three days I arise’ (Matt.
xxvii. 63); Gá gé on mínne wíngeard, and ic sylle eow ðæt riht bið 
‘Go ye into my vineyard and I give ( shall give) you what right
is’ (Matt. xx. 4).
β. Hé mid ðám léohte his gást ágeaf ðam Drihtne ðe hine to his ríce
gelaðode  ‘He with the light his spirit gave-up to the Lord who him to
his Kingdom invited (i.e., had invited)’ (Ælfric; cf. Skeat,
Anglo-Saxon Reader, i., p. 86): Hé ne grétte hi oð ðæt héo cende hyre
sunu  ‘He not knew her until that she brought forth ( had brought
forth) her son.’
In our preceding remarks, we have had occasion to mention that, in
Hebrew, the categories of tense and mood are scarcely differentiated.
Similarly--to some extent--in Sanscrit, the distinction between what we
call tenses and moods is less clearly defined than in, e.g., Latin or
Greek. Of this confusion, or rather absence of distinction, we preserve
some traces in modern usage. Thus, as the imperative is essentially
significant of something still to come, we can understand how a future
phrase as You will do that at once, especially when aided by accent or
emphasis, can be used for ‘You shall, etc.’ Nay, the future is
occasionally used as OPTATIVE; e.g. Sic me di amabunt,  So the gods
will love me, for May the gods love me: and even as DUBITATIVE, as in
the Scottish Ye’ll no be o’ this country, freend? (Scott, Mannering,
ch. i.)  ‘You will not be of this country,’ i.e. ‘I suppose you are
not, etc.’
We have seen that what in formal grammar appears as the ‘object’ of a
verb is often, from a psychological point of view, the subject of a
sentence (cf. Chap. VI.). The use of the passive voice enables us to do
away with this incongruence: the object of the action becomes the
subject of our sentence, and the grammatical construction is thus made
to harmonise with the psychological instinct. For instance, if, in
answer to the question Whom does he prefer as companion? we say John
he would prefer, we overcome, by a construction somewhat alien to the
genius of the English language, the difficulty of expressing that John,
the object of the verb to prefer, is in our mind the subject of a
statement: John is the person whom he would prefer.
But such an inversion as John he would prefer is not always possible;
while such an extension as John is the person whom he would prefer,
though, indeed, always a possible construction, would be felt as very
awkward and needlessly lengthy. This difficulty is evaded by the use of
the passive voice: and the use of this voice serves to give clearness
and elegance to style.
It is, however, perhaps not superfluous to point out that, whether we
employ the active or the passive voice, the ACTUAL relation existing
between the subject and object of our sentence remains the same. Whether
we say John loves Mary, or Mary is loved by John, the person John
is in either case described as the agent; the person Mary is the
object of the feeling expressed by the verb. It is the form only of
the two sentences which differs; it is the syntactical, and not the
real relation of subject and object which varies. Hence we may say
that the distinction of voice in the verb is to some extent purely
syntactical in its nature. It is, moreover, clear that the distinction
implied in voice could not arise before the distinction between the
grammatical subject and object had been established. Until such was the
case, mere juxtaposition of substantive and verb must have served
equally as the expression of the active and of the passive relation
between subject and predicate.
A somewhat similar phenomenon, possibly a survival of this prehistoric
stage, is observable in the nominal forms of the verb, which, though
indeed already specialised in the earliest stages of those languages
with which we are acquainted, contain nothing in their actual formation
which can assign them to either voice. And, again, if we consider fully
the Latin genitives known in grammar as objective and subjective, we
find a similar indefiniteness of expression prevalent as to relationship
active or passive. Amor patris (‘love, father’s’) can, according to
the context, signify either the love which the father feels, or that
which is felt for the father by some one else.
The present participle, now always called active, is even yet
sometimes used in a passive meaning, and this use was formerly much more
common. We hear, even at the present day, such phrases as Do you want
the tea making? I want my coat brushing, etc.[156] Again, we have
expressions like One thing is wanting, common now as in Shakespeare’s
time;[157] so much is owing, etc. Other instances not less striking
have become obsolete: as, his unrecalling crime (Rape of Lucrece, l.
993) for unrecalled  ‘not to be recalled;’ and his all-obeying
breath (Ant. and Cleop., III. xiii. 77)  his breath obeyed by all. We
find, also, Relish your nimble notes to pleasing ears ( pleased ears)
in Rape of Lucrece, l. 1126.
In Gothic there is a remarkable and indeed unique instance of this use
(Mark xv. 15): Atgaf Jesu usbliggvands, i.e. (Pilate) gave Jesus
scourging  gave up Jesus to be scourged, or for being scourged.
The so-called gerundives in Latin have commonly a passive meaning; thus,
amandus usually means ‘fit to be loved.’ But here, again, we meet with
exceptional uses which prove that what is now regarded as the ‘regular’
meaning is in reality but accidental and adventitious. Oriundus means
‘arising’ and, in somewhat older Latin, we find forms like pereundus,
‘perishing,’ placendus, ‘pleasing,’ etc.
Little as the distinction of voice is expressed in the nomen actionis,
it is equally little inherent in the infinite. In such a sentence as I
gave him a good beating, the meaning of beating is active; in the
sentence He got a good beating, it is decidedly passive. Similarly, in
such a sentence as I can read, the infinitive is active, but this is
owing to the context: for instance, in such a sentence as This is not
easy to read, it is clearly passive. Yet no one would call these
phrases ambiguous. We can therefore easily imagine that infinitives may
have existed long before they were differentiated into separate forms to
mark the two voices. We still employ many infinitives which might be
called neuter, neither active nor passive: such as, for instance, ‘Is it
better to say yes or to say no?’ ‘fair to see;’ ‘a marvel to
tell.’
In Gothic, however, we find many instances of infinitives which, being
commonly employed as actives, are conveniently considered as belonging
to that particular voice; but which, in special sentences, have a very
clearly defined passive sense. Thus, qêmun ðan môtarjôs daupjan 
Came then publicans (to) baptise  to be baptised (Luke iii. 12);
Untê sunus mans skulds ist atgiban in handuns mannê  For (the) son
(of) man due is ( must) deliver into hands (of) men  shall be
delivered into. (Luke ix. 44); Varð ðan gasviltan ðamma unlêdin jah
briggan fram aggilum in barma Abrahamis  (It) happened then (to) die
(to) the beggar and (to) bring from ( by) angels into (the) bosom (of)
Abraham  It came to pass that the beggar died and was carried, etc.
(Luke xvi. 22); du saihvan  to see  for being seen (Matt. vi.
1), etc.
Though, then, in these and similar cases we find infinitive forms with
unquestionably passive meanings, it would not be quite correct to assign
them in formal grammar to the passive voice.
A grammatical passive is only acknowledged in cases where that passive
has been formed from the same stem as the active, and has been marked
off from it by a special method of formation, as in such cases as amo,
‘I love,’ amor, ‘I am loved.’ The relation of an intransitive verb to
its corresponding causative, resembles that of a passive to its active,
as in such cases as to fall, to fell; to drink, to drench; to
sit, to set: and the pairs from roots etymologically unrelated, to
make, to become; to kill, to die. In the case of the intransitive
verbs, however, as compared with that of the grammatical passive, we do
not dwell so much in thought upon an operating cause as constituting the
difference between active and passive. But this distinction is so
slight, that we actually find intransitive verbs used with a sequence
such as we should expect after a passive, as in He died by the hand of
the public executioner; He fell by his own ambition. On the other
hand, we can see the transition from the passive to the active in the
case of the Russian--where the active form is employed to express a
passive sense,--and of the so-called deponent verbs. We have to
translate a form like the Latin verti by ‘to turn,’ employing the
middle voice. A case like Jam homo in mercaturâ vortitur, ‘The man is
now busy with merchandise’ (Plautus, Mostellaria, III. i. 109) may serve
to show how nearly allied is the middle or passive voice to the deponent
proper. No doubt a true deponent differs from a verb used in the middle
voice, by the fact that the deponent takes an accusative after it; but
how nearly the two touch one another, may be gathered from such
instances as that given above, by the side of adversari regem (Tac.,
Hist., iv. 84,), ‘to oppose, or to oppose one’s-self to, the king.’
One of the most common ways, in which the passive takes its origin, is
from the middle voice, which is sometimes seen to be formed from the
composition of the active with the reflective pronoun. We have in
English two examples of this method of formation, in the words (to)
bask and (to) busk: to bask means ‘to bathe one’s-self;’ to busk,
‘to prepare one’s-self,’ or ‘get ready.’[158] The sk stands for sik,
as it appears in Icelandic, the accusative case of a reflective pronoun
of the third person. The Russian often, in like manner, employs a
reflective form in -sya instead of the passive, just as does the
French; thus, Tavárni prodáutsya, les hardes se vendent, ‘The goods
are sold,’ lit. ‘sell themselves:’ cf. Rien ne s’y voyait plus, pas
même des débris (De Vigny).[159] ‘Nothing more was to be seen, not even
the ruined remains.’
In these cases, one element of the signification of the middle voice is
discarded. The middle voice denotes that an action starts from a person,
and returns to him. In I strike myself the action ‘strikes’ starts
from the speaker, but visits him again with its effects; in I am
struck the action is visited upon the subject, but does not originate
therewith. There are some reflective combinations, even in English,
where the consciousness of the activity of the subject has practically
disappeared: as in How do you find yourself? I bethought me; He found
himself in an awkward position: but these, it will be seen, approach
more to the use of the simple intransitive, by means of the relationship
which this bears to the passive; cf. s’exciter with être excité; ‘to
be excited:’ moveri, with se movere, ‘to move.’ There are certain
uses of the verb, in French and German, in which the operation of the
subject is almost effaced: as, sich befinden, in Wie befinden sie
sich (‘How are you?’); cela se laisse dire (‘that may be said’).
The reader who remembers and fully apprehends the wider meaning, which
in Chapter VI. we assigned to the terms (Psychological) ‘subject’ and
‘predicate,’ must realise how comparatively seldom the grammatical
categories of the same name coincide with the corresponding parts of the
thought to which the sentence is to give utterance. We defined the
subject as the expression for that which the speaker presupposes known
to the hearer, and the predicate as that which indicates what he wishes
the hearer to think or learn about it. Hence, as we saw, the sentence
theoretically consists of two parts; but, as each of these parts may be
extended, we get--if we indicate subject and predicate by the letters
S and P respectively, and the extensions by a, b, c, etc.--the
following scheme for a simple sentence: Sabc + Pdef.
Now, in such a sentence, the grammatical subject, with all its
extensions, will correspond with the psychological subject, and the
grammatical predicate and its extensions with the psychological
predicate, only in case the extensions of the subject are really no
more than additions made in order to specify the known or
presupposed, and if the predicate contains nothing which serves any
further purpose than to convey the thought about that subject. But as
soon as to the subject-noun, for instance, an adjective is added which
conveys new thought about the subject; or, again, as soon as the
object is indicated by a noun accompanied by a similar ‘additional’
qualification, then these additions or extensions become ipso facto
psychological predicates, and the sentence, grammatically simple,
becomes a psychologically complex one. Thus, suppose a good Charles and
a wicked Charles have been spoken of, and the latter is known to have
done something with his thick stick to the speaker; then, and then only,
can a sentence like The wicked Charles has beaten me with his thick
stick be a psychologically simple one. In this sentence then, The
wicked Charles is subject, has beaten is predicate, and with his
stick extension, and the psychological and grammatical divisions
coincide completely. But suppose that it was known that the same person
had beaten the speaker, but that the instrument was not known; or that
the action and the instrument were known, but not the recipient of the
blows: in this case the sentence, though remaining a simple one, would
at once cease to correspond in its grammatical parts to the
psychological divisions of (a) Charles has beaten me (subject) +
with his stick (predicate), or, (b) Charles has beaten with his
stick (subject) + me (predicate). In fact, if we wished to make the
grammatical form correspond to the divisions of that psychologically
simple statement, we should have to adopt a form grammatically complex;
such as The instrument with which Charles has beaten me is his thick
stick, or, The person whom Charles has beaten with his thick stick is
I, according to the circumstances of the case.
In any of the cases enumerated above, the psychological subject and
predicate were simple. But suppose that the hearer was not aware that
anything had happened, nor could be supposed to have any predisposition
to call the individual in question ‘wicked.’ Then, though the sentence
remains grammatically a simple one, we really get the following complex
PSYCHOLOGICAL analysis:--
    1. Subject: Charles
       Predicate: is (in my opinion) wicked.
    2. Subject: The wicked Charles
       Predicate: has beaten.
    3. Subject: The object of that beating
       Predicate (with copula): is I.
    4. Subject: The instrument with which that beating was inflicted upon me
       Predicate (with copula): is a stick.
    5. Subject: That stick
       Predicate (with copula): is thick.
While, therefore, the scheme could grammatically be symbolised aS +
Pbc, we should have to symbolise the psychological analysis somewhat
as follows:--
    P + S
     {___}
       S´ + P´
        {_____}
           S´´ + P´´
            {_______}
                S´´´ + P´´´
                 {_________}
                      S´´´´ + P´´´´
                       {___________}
At first sight this may seem far-fetched and uselessly refined, but the
student will find that it is desirable to force himself in some such
manner to fully realise the absolute inadequacy of our grammatical terms
and distinctions when we apply them to psychological questions: and to
realise, also, the vagueness with which long habit has taught us to be
satisfied in our modes of expression, and in our constructions for
various thoughts, differing essentially, though perhaps not always
widely.[160] It is the full conception of the somewhat haphazard nature
of our constructions which will help us to understand how uncertain and
how different in various speakers must, on the one hand, be the
correspondence between the grammatical and psychological subject and
predicate; and, on the other, how vague must often be the distinctions
between the parts of our sentences, and how varying the grouping of
these parts, as we more or less consciously conceive of them as
connected or as ‘belonging together.’ All is here fluctuating and
indefinite. Thus, as a rule, the word is in sentences like He is
king, He is subject, is mere copula, and king the real predicate;
though, when we utter the same words in order to state that he and no
one else occupies the throne, he becomes psychologically predicate,
and king, or rather is king, becomes subject, whatever the
grammatical form of the sentence may seem to prove to the contrary.
Again, in He IS king (i.e. now, and not only going to be so), he
as king is subject, is (now) predicate.
Psychologically, the idea of the copula as mere link between subject and
predicate is far more extensive than ordinary grammar admits. Thus, in
What is the matter with him? He has got the toothache, the predicate
of the latter sentence is the toothache, has got is copula.
In Will he be quick, do you think? Oh yes, he was running very
quickly, the words was running are a mere copula, unless, emphasised
by stress of accent, they are made to convey the specially desired
statement that the person spoken of ran, and did not walk slowly or
ride, etc., in which case they are a true predicate.
We have here illustrated how one of the means for distinguishing the
predicate from the other parts of the sentence is found in accent or
stress.
But we do not invariably thus emphasise our predicate. An interrogative
pronoun, for instance, is always a psychological predicate. If we ask
Who has done this? we usually lay our stress on done or on this,
though these words, being mere expressions for the observed and known
fact, contain the psychological subject, and the unknown person
indicated by who is the predicate sought for by the questioner.
There exist other elements of speech which are regularly subjects or
predicates; for instance, a demonstrative referring back to a
substantive previously expressed and commencing a sentence, is
necessarily a psychological subject, or part of it: I know those men
are my enemies: them I despise. A relative pronoun, of course, has the
same function: there is a man whom I respect highly. Again, every
element of a sentence whose connection with the rest is denied by means
of a negative particle is generally a psychological predicate; as,
Yield not me the praise (Tennyson)  ‘The person to whom praise is due
is not I.’ But not to me returns day (Milton, Par. Lost, iii. 41) 
‘Day returns to many, but among those is[161] not I.’
This, of course, includes any words expressing the contrast with the
negatived element: Give not me but him the praise  ‘The person to
whom praise is due is not I, (but) he.’
Besides emphasis, we have, in so-called inverted constructions, the
means of characterising any part of a sentence as subject or predicate.
Thus: One thing thou lackest (Mark x. 21)  ‘One thing there is which
thou hast not.’ ‘No pause of dread Lord William knew’ (Scott, Harold,
v. 15)  ‘Not a pause of dread existed which Lord William knew’  ‘Not a
pause of dread was made by Lord William.’
A means of establishing correspondence between the grammatical and
psychological predicate has been incidentally illustrated in the
foregoing discussion. It is the periphrastic construction with is, of
which instances are very numerous. It is to you, young people, that I
speak; What I most prize in woman, is her affections, not her
intellect (Longfellow); It is thou that robbest me of my Lord
(Shakespeare, 2 Hen. VI., IV. ii.); It was not you that sent me hither,
but God (Gen. xlv. 8).
This construction is quite common in many other languages:
French--C’est a vous que je m’adresse ( ‘It is to you that I myself
address’); German--Christen sind es, die das getan haben (lit.
‘Christians are it, that that done have’  ‘It is (the) Christians that
have done this’).
In English, another construction often serves the same purpose: As to
denying, he would scorn it; As for that fellow, we’ll see about him
to-morrow. Or (with the psychological subject simply in the nominative,
without any verbal indication of its connection with what follows),
Husband and children, she saw them murdered before her very eyes; My
life’s foul deed, my life’s fair end shall free it (Shakespeare, Rape
of Lucr.); The prince ... they will slay him (Ben Jonson, Sejanus,
III. iii.); That thing, I took it for a man (Lear, IV. vi. 77).
Antipholus, my husband ... this ill day a most outrageous fit of
madness took him (Com. of Errors, V. i. 138). When, in this
construction, the words which head the sentence stand for the same thing
as the subject pronoun of the following clause, the result, of course,
is not a readjustment of the parts, but an (often useless) emphasis: cf.
John, he said so; The king, he went, etc. When the psychological
subject would, in the simpler constructions appear as a genitive, this
is indicated by the pronoun standing, in that case, e.g., ’Tis certain
every man that dies ill, the ill is upon his head (Henry V., IV. i.
197). That they who brought me in my master’s hate, I live to look upon
their tragedy (Rich. III., III. ii. 57); And vows so born, in their
nativity all truth appears (Mid. Night’s Dream, III. ii. 124).
In Chapter VI. we have discussed the point that in reality an adjective
is psychologically a predicate: an expression like The good man
containing, in fact, a statement that the man is good. There is a
construction, however,--and one, too, not unfrequent,--in which the
adjective contains the psychological and logical subjects; e.g., The
short time at my disposal prevented me from calling upon him--‘The
shortness of the time prevented,’ etc. Though this construction may
perhaps be due to a contamination between, say, The shortness of the
time prevented and The short time did not allow, it still remains
certain that in the construction, as it stands, a displacement has
occurred.
It might a priori be expected that all this uncertainty and vagueness
would cause parts of a sentence which grammatically belong together to
cohere but loosely, and eventually to get separated, whilst other
grammatical connections, which at first did not exist, would thereby
arise. It is clear, for instance, that in the sentence I sit on a
chair, the preposition on is as closely connected with the verb to
sit as with the noun a chair. Nay, it may be said that the ties which
connect it with the noun in this and similar cases must once have been,
and perhaps in the linguistic consciousness of some speakers still are,
stronger than those between the preposition and the verb. This would
appear from the fact that the various prepositions used to govern in
English--as they still do in German, for instance--various cases, while
these ties would be strengthened by the common occurrence of the
preposition with a noun, unaccompanied by any verb; e.g., That book
there on the chair; The man in the garden, etc. It is, however,
evident in many constructions that the noun has separated from the
preposition, and that the latter has entered into closer connection with
the verb. We owe to this, e.g., the Latin and German ‘compound verbs,’
as excedere, ‘to go out from,’ anliegen, ‘to be incumbent on,’ etc.,
which used to govern, or still do govern the case which would have
followed the preposition if used immediately before the noun and
detached from the verb. In English, this or a similar displacement has
given rise to such constructions as And this rich fair town we make
him lord of (K. John, II. i. 553); a place which we have long heard
of; Washes of all kinds I had an antipathy to (Goldsmith); Logic I
made no account of (Smollett, Rod. Random, 6); This house I no more
show my face in (She stoops to conquer, IV.); The false paiens stood
he by (P. Langtoft).
A careful study of the above examples will show that in these and
several of the following, the construction has the effect and is most
likely due to a desire of bringing the psychological subject to the head
of the sentence. It is at present chiefly employed in relative and
interrogative clauses, and in sentences in the passive voice: The
intended fire your city is ready to flame in (Coriolanus, V. 2); An
idle dare-devil of a boy, whom his friends had been glad to get rid of
(Green, Short History, p. 732); Stories of the lady, which he swore to
the truth of (Tom Jones, bk. xv., ch. 9); He was such a lover, as a
generous friend of the lady should not betray her to (ibid., xiii. 2);
A pipe in his mouth, which, indeed, he seldom was without (ibid., ii.
2): The eclipse which the nominal seat of Christianity was under
(Earle, Anglo-Saxon Liter., p. 25); Such scruple of conscience as the
terrors of their late invented religion had let them into (Puttenham,
Arte of Poesie, Arber’s reprint, p. 24); An outrage confessed to on a
death-bed (Liv. Daily Post, Aug. 1, 1884, p. 5, col. a.); He was
seldom talked of, etc. What humour is the prince of? (Hen. IV., II.
iv).[162]
In the sentence I will never allow you to read this book, there is no
doubt that every speaker feels this book as object of read, and
read this book as object of allow. If, however, in order to make
this book if it is psychological subject, appear also as the
grammatical subject, we say This book I shall never allow you to read,
we can very well understand how a speaker’s linguistic sense may come to
connect this book directly as object with the entire group allow to
read, nay more, with the verb allow; as if it stood for I will never
allow you this book to read. This may arise all the more easily that,
in a clause like I have to read this book, the words this book are
historically the object of have and not of the infinitive to read,
and that, in the form this book I have to read, the noun is in close
proximity to its historical government I have. Hence, such
transference of government from the infinitive to the group finite
verb + infinitive and finally to the finite verb has occasionally
really taken place, as can be shown by the way in which such clauses
have sometimes been turned into the passive voice. A sentence like The
judge allowed them to drop the prosecution can, strictly speaking, be
turned into the passive only in one or other of the following ways:
They were allowed to drop the prosecution, or, The judge allowed that
the prosecution should be dropped; in each of which cases, the object
of the verb has become the subject of the same verb in the passive
voice. If, however, aided by such constructions as The prosecution
which the judge allowed them to drop, the object (prosecution) of the
verb to drop becomes, first, object of the syntactical combination
allow to drop, and, finally, in the illogical thinker’s consciousness
or linguistic sense, object of the verb to allow,--there may arise a
passive construction something like the following: The prosecution
which was allowed to be dropped. This construction is indeed incorrect
in English, but its parallel may be occasionally heard from careless
speakers, and a careful study of it will illustrate and make
intelligible such phrases as the German, Hier ist sie zu spielen
verboten, literally  ‘Here is she (i.e., Minna v. Barnhelm,
i.e., the play of that name) to play forbidden’  ‘Here it has been
forbidden to play her (sc. it),’ as passive of ‘They have forbidden to
play it here;’ Die stellung des fürsten Hohenlohe wird zu untergraben
versucht  ‘The position of the Prince Hohenlohe is to undermine
attempted’  ‘An attempt is being made to undermine the position, etc.;’
or again, the Greek χιλίων δράχμων ἀπορρηθεισῶν λαβεῖν (Demosthenes),
lit. ‘One thousand drachms having been agreed to receive’  ‘It having
been agreed that I should receive one thousand drachms.’ Similarly, the
Latin Librum legere cœpi  (‘I begin to read the book’) is turned into
the passive, Liber legi cœptus est  (‘The book to be read has been
begun’), the perfect parallel of our somewhat fictitious English
example.
In our examples, ‘He has got the toothache,’ etc., we saw that the
grammatical predicate often has, in reality, no other psychological
function than that of mere copula, or, as it is often called, connecting
word. The regular and constant use of certain words in that manner has
led some grammarians to group these together as a separate grammatical
category, a grouping or distinction to which many others vigorously
object. The view which one takes in this question is mainly influenced
by (a) what we call a ‘connecting word,’ and (b) a clear distinction
between the grammatical form and the function of a word. Now, a
connecting word is a word which serves to indicate the connection
between two ideas or conceptions, and which accordingly can neither
stand alone, nor have any definite sense if placed with only one such
conception. Such a connecting word between subject and predicate we have
in the verb to be, the copula, in most of its uses. It is said by some
that the word is never has any other function than that of true
predicate, and that the predicatival adjective or noun is always to be
considered a determinant of the predicate. This, whilst true as to
grammatical form, is certainly incorrect as to function. In the
first place, we have already discussed (Chap. VI.) how sentences like
Borrowing is sorrowing, contains no less, but also no more than
Borrow sorrow, in which the latter word contains the true psychologic
predicate. Further, if we were to attribute to the word is in such
sentences the same force as, for instance, in God is, i.e., God
exists, we should necessarily have to explain a sentence, This is
impossible, as ‘This exists as something impossible;’ which every one
will at once perceive to be nonsense.
We must recognise in sentences like Borrow sorrow an original
construction, by the side of which there sooner or later arose clauses
truly denoting existence, such as God is, or even God is good, in
which, at first, is had its full meaning of exists, and good had
consequently such the function of an adverb. When once, in the latter
and similar sentences, a displacement and redistribution of the function
began to take place, and the adjective good (or, e.g., the noun
king in He is king) acquired the force of a true logical predicate,
the fuller construction with the copula is more and more frequently
ousted the shorter one, which had no such link between subject and
predicate. The reluctance of some grammarians to admit this is perhaps
partially due, also, to the fact that the copula has always retained the
full inflectional forms of a true predicatival verb. Hence they did not
so easily realise the displacement which had occurred--a displacement
which, in other sentences, where the part thereby affected is
flectionless, is easier to demonstrate.
We shall first discuss one more instance of how a displacement affects
inflected parts of speech, and then one or two in which the words
concerned have no longer any inflection to connect them with other
forms, and to protect them from isolation and change of function.
In the sentences I make him and I make a king, we have two
accusatives of slightly different functions: the one indicating the
OBJECT of the action (him), and the other indicating the RESULT of the
action (a king). If the two statements be now combined, then, applied
as they are to convey to the hearer the two distinct pieces of
information as to the object and as to the results of the action, both
of which were previously unknown to him, we have undoubtedly one verb
with two distinct and equipoised accusatives. But assuming that either
the object of the action or the result is already known, it is then only
the other member of the pair which has the full predicatival force,
whilst the former inevitably enters into a closer relationship with the
verb. The member which retains the full force of a predicate becomes
predicate to the group; nay, even--as in our example, where the verb
cannot be taken in its literal meaning--the one noun becomes almost a
predicate to the other, I make him king being very similar in meaning
to He becomes king through my agency. If this is the correct
explanation of the origin of similar constructions, we must perhaps
consider the use of an adjective as second accusative as due to analogy
with this use of the noun. We must not forget, however, that the line of
demarcation between adjective and noun was once very much more vague and
indefinite than it is now.
In a similar way, the sentence I teach him to speak and I declare him
to be an honest man must be a combination, with consequent displacement
of relation, of two independent clauses--the one with a noun, or the
equivalent thereof, and the other with an infinite as object. It is thus
we explain the origin of the Latin accusative with infinitive.
An example of displacement, or re-arrangement of relations, is next
furnished by the origin and history of our correlatives either, or,
both, and. Either means originally (A.S. ægðer, contracted from
æghwæðer  á + ge + hwæðer) one of two, so that either he or
you is really  one of the two; you or he, where the word either,
as it were, sums up or comprehends the whole of the following
enumeration. It stands, therefore, in syntactical relation to both the
members of the clause which are connected (or contrasted) by or; but
is now usually felt as connected with the first only, the sentence being
divided as either he + or you. Similarly, both means two
together. Hence both you and I originally had the full force of the
two together, i.e., you and I. The word which stood in syntactical
relation with the pair has therefore, as in the former case, become
co-ordinate with the word and, which once formed part of the group it
governed, and we now feel and explain expressions like our examples as
consisting of the two groups, both you + and I.
In the last two examples the words are now flectionless, and have
become, when used in such constructions, connecting words, a change
entirely owing to such displacement of relationship between the parts of
the sentence as we have been studying in this chapter.
In the discussion of our example on page 270 we noticed how even a
grammatically simple clause might in reality be a logically complex one.
Vice versâ, a clause logically simple may be expressed by a
grammatically complex sentence. I asked him after his health, as an
answer to What were you asking him? is a psychologically and
grammatically simple sentence.[163] The answer might, however, without
in the least degree altering the thought expressed, have been cast in
the form I asked him how he was--a grammatically complex sentence.
Again, logical independence and grammatical co-ordination do not by any
means necessarily go together--a sentence like He first went to Paris,
whence he proceeded to Rome, where he met his friend being in form
complex with main and subordinate clauses; in meaning, however,
equivalent to an aggregate of three co-ordinate ‘main’ clauses: He
went + from there he proceeded + there he met.
Nay, it occasionally happens that syntactical form and logical function
are in direct opposition. Thus, e.g., in Scarcely had he entered the
house, when his mother exclaimed, There is John! what is logically the
main clause has the grammatical or syntactical form of a subordinate
one.
It cannot now, therefore, seem strange that in syntax we also meet with
the parallel of the process which gave birth to such words as adder,
orange, newt, and nickname. Adder, cf. Ger. natter, Icelandic
naðr, was in Anglo-Saxon nædre. Similarly, orange, derived from
the Persian nâranj, was originally preceded by an n. In the
combination with the indefinite article a or an (the older form)
this n was thought to belong to the article only, and the sound-groups
anorange, anadder were wrongly split up into an + orange, an +
adder. On the other hand, the groups anekename (really an +
ekename) and anewt (really an + ewt) were erroneously broken up
into a + newt, a + nickname.[164]
A precisely similar occurrence in syntax has given us our conjunction
that. I know that ( ‘I know this thing’) + he can sing, when
combined into the group of subject I, predicate know, object
(double, the one part being explanatory of the other) that and he can
sing, gradually became divided, or divisible for the linguistic
consciousness, into I know + he can sing, with the conjunction
that for connecting word.
In some cases the correspondence between psychological and grammatical
distribution is so incomplete, the subordinate and main clauses are so
interwoven in the grammatical form, that it becomes impossible to
separate the parts in our ordinary analysis. This happens more
especially when a part of the grammatically subordinate clause really
contains the psychological subject, and when, consequently, that part,
with a construction similar to that discussed on page 274 is put at the
head of the clause. When, in the sentence I believe that something will
make you smile, the word something expressed the psychological
subject, Goldsmith emphasised this fact by writing, Something, that I
believe will make you smile; cf. Milton’s Whereof I gave thee charge
thou shouldst not eat; With me I see not who partakes, etc. This
arrangement, then, places the main clause between parts of what is
grammatically the subordinate one. In not a few cases confusion or
uncertainty may, then, arise as to whether the words which head the
sentence must be considered as belonging to the subordinate clause or as
governed by the verb of the main clause. If we say The place which he
knew that he could not obtain, we may hesitate as to whether place is
really object to knew or to obtain. We can, and often do, avoid this
ambiguity and intermixture of main and subordinate clauses by a kind of
double construction, like The place, of which he knew that he could not
obtain it.
In inflectional languages, words relating to the same thing in the same
way are commonly made to correspond formally with each other. This
correspondence we call grammatical concord. Thus we find concord in
gender, number, case, and person subsisting between a substantive and
its predicate or attribute, or between a substantive and a pronoun or
adjective representing the latter. Similarly we find a correspondence in
tense and mood within the same period, or complex of sentences. This
concord can hardly be said to be the necessary result of the logical
relation of the words; the English collocation, the good father’s
child, where no formal concord is established between ‘the good’ and
‘father’s,’ seems as logical as des guten vater’s kind, where the
article and the adjective have their respective genitive forms as well
as the noun. Concord seems to have taken its origin from cases in which
the formal correspondence of two words with each other came about, not
owing to the relation borne by the former to the latter, but merely to
the identity of their relation to some other word. Thus we should have
an example of primitive concord in fratris puer boni, if felt by the
speaker’s linguistic consciousness something like of (my) brother
(the) child of (the) good (one), i.e., the child of (my) brother, the
good, i.e., the child of (my) good brother.
After such correspondence began to be regularly conceived of as concord,
i.e., as a habit natural to language, we must suppose that, owing to
the operation of analogy, it extended its area to other cases to which
it did not logically belong. We shall be confirmed in our theory that
such was the procedure, if we examine certain cases in which the
extension of concord can still be historically followed.
In the first place, let us take such a case as Ce sont mes frères. In
English we translate this by Those are my brothers. The subject,
however, in this case merely directs attention to something unknown
until the predicate states what has to be known: the English pronoun,
therefore, should strictly speaking stand in the neuter singular, as,
indeed, it habitually did in A.S. ðæt sindon, etc., and as it does in
Modern German to the present day--Das sind meine brüder. Even in
Modern English we have cases like It is we who have won; ’Twas men I
lacked; Is it only the plebeians who will rise? (Bulwer, Rienzi, i.
5); but commonly, in Modern English and elsewhere, it appears brought
into concord with the predicate, as These are thy glorious works
(Milton): in Italian--È questa la vostra figlia?  ‘Is this (fem.)
your daughter?’ Spanish--Esta es la espada  ‘This (fem.) is the
sword’ (fem.): in Greek--Αὕτη τοι δίκη ἐστι θεῶν (Homer)  ‘This (fem.),
then, is the judgment (fem.) of the gods:’ and in Latin this use is
extremely common; as, Eas divitias, eam bonam famam, magnamque
nobilitatem, putabant (Sall., Cat., 7),[165]  ‘These (fem. plur.) they
considered riches (fem. plur.), this (fem. sing.) a good name (fem.),
and great nobility (fem.);’ i.e., ‘This they looked upon as true
riches; by such means they strove for fame; that was what they thought
conferred true rank:’ Patres C. Mucio agrum dono dedere quæ postea sunt
Mucia prata appellata (Livy, ii. 13)  ‘The fathers (senate) gave to C.
Mucius a field as a present which (neut. plur.) afterwards were
called the Mucian fields (neut. plur.).’
On the other hand, we find instances like Sabini spem in discordia
Romana ponunt: eam impedimentum delectui fore (Livy, iii. 38)  ‘The
Sabines base their expectations on the domestic quarrels of the Romans;
(they hoped) that this (fem. sing. agreeing with spem) would be a
preventative (neut. sing.): and so Si hoc profectio est (Livy, ii. 38)
 If this (neut.) is a setting-out (fem.).’ It seems that, in the former
cases, the subject has been made to agree with the predicate just as the
predicate in other cases conforms to the subject.
We sometimes find, in Latin, words which commonly occur in the singular
only, placed in the plural when connected with words used in the plural
only; as, summis opibus atque industriis (Plautus, Mostellaria, 348) 
‘with the greatest means (exertions) and zeals (for zeal):’ neque
vigiliis neque quietibus (Sallust, Cat., 15)  ‘neither during
watchings nor during rests (for rest):’ paupertates--divitiæ
(Varro,[166] Apud Non.)  ‘poverties (for poverty)--riches.’
Similarly, we find She is my goods, my chattels (Shakespeare, Tam. of
Shrew, III. ii.), where the singular would be the natural form for
chattel; but good in the singular would have a different meaning
from goods, and chattels is made to conform to goods.
The so-called predicatival dative in Latin seems to have started from
cases like quibus hoc impedimento erat  ‘to whom this was for a
hindrance:’ Mihi gaudio fuit  ‘It was for a joy to me:’ etc.
It was felt that the ordinary predicate was put in the same case as its
subject, and the concord was analogically extended to the dative. Thus
Cicero (Dom., 3) writes Illis incuria inimicorum probro non fuit  ‘To
them (dat.) the negligence of their enemies was not (for a) reproach’
(dat.), i.e., ‘was no reproach,’ as contrasted with tuum scelus meum
probrum esse  ‘that your wickedness (acc.) should be my reproach
(acc.).’
In a sentence like They call him John the name John ought strictly
speaking to have no case; the simple stem should stand: and we might
even expect the vocative to occur after verbs of naming, as it actually
does sometimes in Greek; as, Τί με καλεῖτε κύριε; (Luke vi. 46),
translated, in the Vulgate, Quid vocatis me domine?[167] and in the
authorised version, Why call ye me lord, lord? Thus in Latin, too:
Clamassent ut litus Hyla, Hyla, omne sonaret (Vergil, Eclogue vi. 43),
‘They were shouting so that the whole shore was echoing Hylas! Hylas!’
(voc.); Matutine pater seu Jane libentius audis (Hor., Sat. II., vi.
10), ‘O Father Matutinus, or Janus, if thou givest readier ear thus
addressed.’ But the most common usage at the present day is the
accusative; which is already found at least once in the few remnants of
Gothic literature which we possess: in Luke iv. 13, we read: Jah
gavaljands us im tvalib, ðanzei jah apaustuluns namnida  ‘and choosing
out (from) them twelve whom also apostles (acc. plur.) (he) named.’ This
accusative seems to be an analogical transference from such cases as the
common construction, Izei ðiudan sik silban taujið  Qui regem se
facit  Who king himself makes.
In cases like He bears the name John, the pure stem, or the nominative
which most nearly represents it, should stand; as it does in the
instance given. In English, we often use phrases like ‘the name of
John,’ after the analogy of ‘the city of Rome,’ etc. In Latin, we find
merely exceptionally such cases as Lactea nomen habet (Ovid, Metam.,
i. 168)  ‘It (the Milky Way) has the name milky,’ where milky is
nominative. In classical Latin, concord is observed by placing the
nominative side by side with nomen when this word stands in the
nominative; as, Cui nomen Arethusa est (Cicero, Verr., iv. 53) 
‘Whose name is Arethusa;’ Ei morbo nomen est avaritia (Cicero, Tusc.
Disp., iv. 11)  ‘To that malady the name is avarice.’ But we not
uncommonly find in Latin that, while the word nomen is in the
nominative, the name itself is made to agree with the noun or pronoun
expressing the person who bears it; as, Nomen Mercurio est mihi
(Plautus, Amph., Prol. 19)  ‘The name is Mercury (dat.) to me (dat.),’
i.e. ‘My name is Mercury;’ Puero ab inopia Egerio inditum nomen
(Livy, i. 34)  ‘To the boy (dat.) from his poverty Egerius (dat.) was
given the name,’ i.e. ‘The name of Egerius was given to the boy from
his poverty.’ Nay, we find a similar vacillation in concord where
nomen is in the accusative case; as, Filiis duobus Philippum et
Alexandrum et filiæ Apamam nomina imposuerat (Livy, xxxv. 47)  ‘To his
two sons he had given the names Philip and Alexander, and to his
daughter, Apama.’ In this sentence, we have nomen in the accusative
plural and the names Philip, etc., also in the accusative, though
singular; so that the latter agree in case with nomen, and not with
the datives (filiis duobus and filiæ) of the persons bearing them.
In the following instance the reverse is the case: Cui Superbo
cognomen facta indiderunt (Livy, i. 49)  ‘To whom (dat.) Superbus
(dat.) the name (acc.) his deeds have given,’ i.e. ‘To whom his deeds
have given the name Superbus.’ This very vacillation proves that the
speakers recognised no logical necessity for employing one case rather
than another; but, in default of an absolute stem, chose a case which
seemed to tally with some existing principle of concord already
prevailing in language.
A similar vacillation occurs in cases of the predicatival noun or
predicatival attributive with an infinitive, as in It suited him to
remain unknown.
In English no doubt could arise, as the adjectives maintain an absolute
form; but even in German, where the adjectives when used as predicates
have different forms from those which they bear when used as epithets,
it is correct to say, Es steht dir frei als verständiger mann zu
handeln  ‘It stands thee free as sensible man to act,’ i.e. ‘You are
free to act as a man of sense,’--in which case we find the declined
nominative ‘verständiger,’ used as it is whenever the adjective is
followed by a noun, and when, consequently, according to the rules of
German grammar, the undeclined form cannot be employed.
In Latin the nominative stands if it can be connected with the subject
of the governing verb: as, Pater esse disce (‘Learn to be a father’);
Omitto iratus esse (‘I cease to be angry’); Cupio esse victor (‘I
desire to be victor’). In poetry we find expressions like ait fuisse
navium celerrimus (Catullus, iv. 2)  ‘Says that it was the fastest of
ships,’--a construction copied by Milton in ‘And knew not eating death’
(Par. Lost, ix. 792:) ‘Sensit medios delapsus in hostes’ (Vergil, Æn.,
ii. 377)  ‘He perceived that he had fallen into the midst of enemies.’
In these cases, celerrimus and delapsus are nominative, instead of
the usual accusative; and similarly, in Greek, we find the nominative
coupled with the infinitive used substantively, though this may be in
another case: as, Ὁπόθεν ποτὲ ταύτην τὴν ἐπωνυμίαν ἔλαβες τὸ μανικὸς
καλεῖσθαι, οὐκ οἶδα ἔγωγε (Plato, Symp., 173 D), ‘Whence ever thou didst
take this name the-to-be-called mad (nom. sing. masc.), I don’t know;’
Ὀρέγονται τοῦ πρῶτος εκαστος γίγνεσθαι (Thucydides, ii. 65), ‘They wish
for the (gen.) first (nom.) each (nom.) to become (gen.),’ i.e. ‘They
all wish to become first.’ Nay, in Greek, it is possible to connect with
the infinitive even a genitive or dative depending on the governing
sentence; as in Εὐδαίμοσιν ὑμῖν ἔξεστι γίγνεσθαι (Demosthenes, Dem. iii.
23), ‘It is permitted you (dat.) to become happy (dat.);’ Ἐδέοντο Κύρου
ὡς προθυμοτάτου γενέσθαι (Xenophon, Hell., I. v. 2), ‘They were begging
Cyrus (gen.) to show himself as energetic-as-possible (gen.).’
In Latin we find the connection with a dative, though not so widely as
in Greek: as, Animo otioso esse impero (Terence, Phorm., II. ii. 26) 
‘Mind (dat.) easy (dat.) to be I command (myself--dative understood),’
i.e. ‘I order my mind to be at ease;’ Da mihi fallere, da justo
sanctoque videri (Hor., Ep. I. xvi. 61), ‘Grant me to deceive, grant
me (dat.) to seem just and holy (dat.);’ Vobis necesse est fortibus
viris esse (Livy, xxi. 44), ‘It is necessary for you (dat.) to be brave
men (dat.);’ and commonly with licet (‘it is allowed,’) as in
Republica mihi neglegenti esse non licet (Cicero, ad Att., i. 17), ‘In
politics I dare not be indifferent.’[168] To take this last example, for
instance, we have (1) the governing sentence Non mihi licet (‘It is
not lawful for me,’ dat.), (2) the infinitive esse (‘to be’), and
(3) the dative (depending on the governing sentence, and connected with
the infinitive), neglegenti (‘indifferent’).
There are a few exceptions to this customary usage.[169] The accusative
is sometimes found after licet, as in the passage Si civi Romano
licet esse Gaditanum, etc., ‘If it is allowed a Roman Citizen (dat.)
to be a citizen of Gades (acc.).’ This use depends on the fact that
the accusative is the ordinary case of the subject with the infinitive,
e.g. Permitto civem Romanum esse Gaditanum,[170] ‘I permit a Roman
Citizen (acc.) to be a citizen of Gades (acc.).’
There are, again, other cases in which no concord is expressed; in which
concord, indeed, is almost incapable of being carried out. In these
cases, in default of the pure stem which--were it possible to employ
it--would be the only natural form to employ, the place has been
supplied by the nominative. In English, for instance, we are familiar
with such phrases as My profession as teacher, his position as
advocate. In Latin we find such constructions as Sempronius causa ipse
pro se dicta damnatur (Livy, iv. 44.), ‘Sempronius is condemned, his
cause having been defended (abl. abs.) himself (nom.);’ Omnes in
spem suam quisque acceptis prœlium poscunt (Livy, xxi. 45), ‘All they
having been accepted after their own hopes, each demand battle’ (here
omnes (‘all’) is nominative, while acceptis (‘having been accepted’)
is ablative absolute); Flumen Albin transit longius penetrata Germania
quam quisquam priorum (Tacitus, Annals, iv. 45), ‘He crosses the river
Elbe after penetrating Germany further than any of his predecessors,’
lit. ‘Germany having been penetrated (abl. abs.) further than any (nom.)
of his predecessors (i.e. had penetrated it).’ In these cases, no
doubt ipse and quisquam, ‘himself’ and ‘any,’ depend,
grammatically speaking, on the subject of the finite verb, but they
belong logically to the ablative absolute only, with which they cannot
be brought into concord.
Variation of concord exists between two parts of the same sentence in
various languages, as in the case of ‘What is six winters?’
(Shakespeare, Rich. II., I. iii.), as against ‘What are six winters?’
‘Such was my orders,’ as against ‘Such were my orders;’ ‘She is my
goods;’[171] ‘What means these questions?’ (Young, Night Thoughts, iv.
398). Bacon (Advancement of Learning, II. ii. 7) has ‘A portion of the
time wherein there hath been the greatest varieties.’ The original
rule was that the copula, like every other verb, followed the number of
the subject, as in the first-named instances; and as, again, in French,
in such cases as C’est eux, ‘It is they;’ Il est cent usages, ‘There
is hundred usages;’ C’était les petites îles, ‘It was the little
islands.’ In Latin, also, Nequam pax est indutiæ (A. Gellius), ‘A
truce (lit. truces) is a bad peace;’ Contentum rebus suis esse maximæ
sunt divitiæ (Cicero, Pro. Ar., vi. 3), ‘To be content with one’s
circumstances are the greatest riches.’ In these cases it is indifferent
which substantive be considered the logical subject.
In German, on the other hand, it is common, when the predicate is
plural, to put the copula in the same number; as, das sind zwei
verschiedene dinge  ‘That are two different things.’ Other languages
have corresponding usages; thus, in Modern Greek, Ἔπρεπε νὰ ἦναι
τέσσαρα, ‘There behoves to be four.’ In Old Greek we find Τὸ χωρίον
τοῦτο, ὅπερ πρότερον Ἑννέα ὁδοὶ εκαλοῦντο, ‘This spot which were
before called the nine ways’ (Thuc., iv. 102); and in French we find
such expressions as Ce sont des bêtises, ‘This are stupidities.’ Even
in English we find such phrases as ‘Their haunt are the deep gorges of
the mountains.’[172] The usage seems due to the fact that the plural
makes itself more characteristically felt than the singular. On the
other hand, in several languages the converse usage is possible; i.e.
the copula in the singular stands with a plural subject and before a
singular predicate: as, in Greek, Αἵ χορηγίαι ἱκανὸν εὐδαιμονίας σημεῖον
ἐστι, ‘The services is a sufficient token of prosperity:’ in
Latin--Loca quæ Numidia appellatur (Sallust), ‘Places which is called
Numidia;’ Quas geritis vestes sordida lana fuit (Ovid, Ars Am., iii.
222), ‘The clothes you wear was dirty wool:’ in English--Two paces in
the vilest earth is room enough (Shakespeare, 1 Hen. IV., V. iv. 91);
Forty yards is room enough (Sheridan, Rivals, v. 2). We also find the
curious instance of ‘Sham heroes, what are called quacks’ (Carlyle,
Past and Present, ii. 7): in Spanish we have Los encamisados era gente
medrosa, ‘The highwaymen (lit. ‘shirtclad’) was a cowardly lot’
(Cervantes).
Similarly, we find in the person of the verb a corresponding usage: It
was you; Is that they? in French--C’est moi (‘It is I’); C’est
nous (‘It is we’); C’est vous (‘It is you’): in Old French it was
possible to say C’est eux (‘It is they’). On the other hand, in Modern
German we find such forms as Das waren sie (‘That were you’); Sind
sie das (‘Are you that’): and in Old French, Ce ne suis je pas 
‘This no am I (at-all);’ C’estez vous (‘This are you’); but C’ont
été (‘This they have been’); Ce furent les Phéniciens qui inventèrent
l’écriture (Bossuet), ‘It were (3rd plur.) the Phenicians who invented
writing.’
In sentences beginning in English with there, and in French with the
(neut.) il, we find that commonly in English the verb agrees in number
with the subject which follows it, whilst in French it agrees with the
pronoun il, as Il est des gens de bien (‘There is good people’);
Rarement il arrive des révolutions (‘Rarely there happens
revolutions’). In English we more commonly find the plural; cf. Mätzner,
vol. ii., p. 106--There were many found to deny it: but we also find
There is no more such Cæsars (Shakespeare, Cymb., III. i.).[173]
A participle employed as a predicate or copula may agree with the
predicatival substantive instead of the subject; as, Πάντα διήγησις οὖσα
τυγχάνει (Plato, Rep., 392 D), ‘Everything happens to be an
explanation,’ where the part. οὖσα (lit. ‘being’) agrees with διήγησις
(‘explanation’); Paupertas mihi onus visum (Terence, Phorm., I. ii.
44), ‘Poverty (fem.) to me a burden (neut.) seemed (neut. part.)’ 
‘Poverty seemed to me a burden;’ Nisi honos ignominia putanda est
(Cicero, pro Balb., 3), ‘Unless honour (masc.) is to be thought (fem.)
shame (fem.).’ On the other hand, we find Semiramis puer esse credita
est (Justin, i. 2)  ‘Semiramis was thought to be a boy,’ where the
part. credita (‘thought’) takes its gender from Semiramis, and not
from puer.
The predicate, again, which would naturally follow the subject, may
follow some apposition of the subject: as, Θήβαι, πόλις ἀστυγέιτων, ἐκ
μέσης τῆς Ἑλλάδος ἀνήρπασται (Æschines v. Ctes., 133 ), ‘Thebes (plur.)
a neighbouring city, is torn from the centre of Greece;’
Latin--Corinthum totius Græciæ lumen extinctum esse voluerunt (Cicero,
Leg. Man., 5), ‘Corinth (fem.), the light of all Greece, they wished to
be extinguished (neut.).’ Again, though the subject is plural, we find
the verb agreeing with its distributival apposition, and placed in the
singular; as, Pictores et poetæ, suum quisque opus a vulgo considerari
vult (Cic., de Offic., i. 41), ‘Painters and poets each wishes that
his work should be examined by the public.’
The construction is more striking still in which the predicate is made
to agree with a noun compared with the subject (1) in gender--as, Magis
pedes quam arma tuta sunt (Sallust, Jugurtha, 74[174])  ‘Feet (masc.)
are safer (neut.) than arms (neut.):’ (2) in number--Me non tantum
literæ, quantum longinquitas temporis mitigavit (Cicero, Fam., vi. 4) 
‘Me not so much letters as length of time has comforted:’ (3) in
gender and number--as, Quand on est jeunes, riches, et jolies, comme
vous, mesdames, on n’en est pas réduites à l’artifice (Diderot), ‘When
one (sing.) is young, rich, and pretty, (fem. plur.) as you are,
ladies, one (sing.) is not reduced (fem. plur.) to artifice:’ (4) in
person and number--as, Ἡ τύχη ἀεὶ βέλτιον ἢ ἡμεὶς ἡμῶν αὐτῶν
ἐπιμελούμεθα (Demosthenes, Phil., I. 12), ‘Fortune always for us more
than we care for ourselves.’ In English we meet with many sentences
like ‘Sully bought of Monsieur de la Roche Guzon one of the finest
horses that was ever seen.’ The concord of the predicate with a
second subject connected with the words and not is also curious; as,
Heaven, and not we, have safely fought to-day (Shakespeare, 2 Hen.
IV., IV. ii.).[175]
In Greek, an apposition separated from the noun by a relative sentence
may follow the relative pronoun in case; as, Κύκλωπος κεχόλωται, ὃν
οφθάλμου ἀλάωσεν, ἀντίθεον Πολύφημον (Hom., Od., i. 69), ‘He is wrath
with the Cyclops (gen.) whom (acc.) he deprived of an eye, the
divine Polyphemus (acc.).’
A demonstrative or relative, instead of following the substantive to
which it refers, may follow a noun predicated of it; as, in Latin,
Leucade sunt hæc decreta; id caput Arcadiæ erat (Livy, xxxiii. 17),
‘These things were decreed at Leucas (fem.); that (neut.) in the capital
(neut.) of Arcadia;’ Thebæ quod Bœotiæ caput est, ‘Thebes (fem. plur.)
which (neut.) is the capital (neut.) of Bœotia;’ Φόβος ἣν αἰδὼ εἴπομεν
(Plat.), ‘Fear (masc.) which (fem.) we call modesty (fem.).’
A relative pronoun logically referring to an impersonal indefinite
subject usually follows the definite predicate belonging to that
subject; and, of course, the predicate of the pronoun does the same.
Thus we have to say ‘It was a man who told me,’ and not ‘It was a
man which told me:’ ‘It is the lord Chancellor whose decision is
questioned.’ It is the same in German and in French; as, C’est eux qui
ont bâti (‘It is they who have built’). In French, too, the person
of the verb in the relative sentence follows the definite predicate, as
C’est moi seul qui suis coupable (‘It is I alone who am guilty’);
and it is the same in English--‘It is I who am in fault.’ On the other
hand, in N.H.G. the use is to say Du bist es, der mich gerettet hat,
‘Thou art it who me saved has,’  ‘It is thou that (who) hast saved
me.’
In a relative sentence, the verb connected with the subject of the
governing sentence goes into the first or second person, even though the
relative pronoun belongs to the predicate, and the third person would
strictly be natural: cf. Non sum ego is consul qui nefas arbitrer
Gracchos laudare  ‘I am not such a consul who should think (1st
pers.) it base to praise the Gracchi’ (Cicero); Neque tu is es qui
nescias  ‘Nor are you he who would ignore’ (2nd pers.), i.e. ‘Nor
are you such a one as to ignore.’
In English, this construction is very common; as, ‘If thou beest he: but
O how fall’n! how changed From him, who in the happy realms of light
didst outshine myriads’ (Milton, Par. Lost, bk. i., 84, 85); ‘I am the
person who have had’ (Goldsmith, Good-nat. Man, iii.). This
construction was common in Anglo-Saxon; as, Secga œnigum ðâra ðe
tirleâses trôde sceawode  ‘Of the men to any of those (plur.) who of
the inglorious the track looked at (sing.)’ + ‘To any of the men who
looked at the track (of the) inglorious (man)’ (Beowulf, 844).
So in French--Je suis l’homme qui accouchai d’un œuf (Voltaire), ‘I am
the man who laid (1st. pers.) an egg’; Je suis l’individu qui ai fait
le crime, ‘I am the person who have done the crime;’ and Italian--Io
sono colui chi ho fatto, ‘I am he who have done.’
The predicate or attribute, instead of agreeing with the subject, or
with the word which it serves to define, may agree with a genitive
dependent on that subject; as, Ἦλθε δ’ ἐπί ψυχή Θηβαίου Τειρεσίαο
χρύσεον σκῆπτρον ἔχων (Homer, Od., xi. 90), ‘The soul (fem.) of the
Theban Teresias (masc.) came having (masc.) a golden sceptre.’ In
English we find ‘There are eleven days’ journey from Horeb unto
Kadesh-barnea’ (Deut. i. 2).
In French it is customary to say La plupart de ses amis
l’abandonnèrent, ‘The most part of his friends abandoned (plur.) him;’
but La plupart du peuple voulait, ‘The most part of the people wished
(sing.):’ in the former case the quantity of individuals is regarded; in
the latter the people are looked upon as a totality divided.
The attribute sometimes in Latin and Greek, referring to the person
addressed, appears in the vocative: as, Quibus Hector ab oris Expectate
venis? (Vergil, Æn., ii. 282), ‘From what shores, Hector, O long
expected, dost come?’ Stemmate quod Tusco ramum millesime ducis
(Persius, iii. 28), ‘Because thou, O thousandth, dost draw thy lineage
from an Etruscan tree.’ Thus, in Greek, Ὄλβιε, κῶρε, γένοιο (Theocr.,
Id., xvii. 66), ‘Mayst thou be happy, O boy,’ lit. ‘O happy, O boy,
mayst thou be!’
Such examples as these may aid us to understand the way in which concord
has spread beyond the area to which it strictly belonged. And we may
gather from these some idea of the way in which this process grew up in
prehistorical times. We must remember, however, that concord was not
felt so indispensable in the earliest stages of language, because
absolute forms without inflectional suffixes were then the rule.
The question now comes, What were the rudiments from which concord
proceeded? We must suppose that a period once existed in which
substantives coalesced with the stem of the verb, and in which pronouns
could precede the stem, just as our actual verbal inflections seem to
owe their origin in many cases to the coalition of pronouns with the
stem. We must therefore suppose that, just as it was possible to say
Διδω-μι (‘Give I’), so it was possible to say ‘Go father,’ ‘Father go’
(for ‘Father goes’); and ‘I go,’ just as it was possible to say ‘Go I,’
‘Go thou,’ ‘Go he’ (instead of ‘I go,’ etc.). There are actually some
non-Indo-European languages in which the third person singular differs
from the other persons by dispensing with any suffix. Such is
Hungarian,[176] in which the root ‘fog,’ ‘seize,’ is thus
declined--fog-ok, fogo-s, fog. Here, then, the original plan
maintains itself, of coalition according to the formula ‘Go-father,’ or
‘Father-go.’ In the next stage, the subject is repeated, as, when we say
Ἔγω δίδωμι, we are really saying ‘I give I.’ This process is very
common in some modern languages, especially in poetry, when emphasis is
to be given to the subject: as, The night it was still, and the moon it
shone (Kirke White, Gondoline);[177] The skipper he stood beside the
helm (Longfellow): Je le sais, moi; Il ne voulut pas, lui; Toi, tu
vivras vil et malheureux,--‘I know it, I;’ ‘He would not, he;’ ‘Thou,
thou shalt live vile and wretched.’ Similar is the anticipation of the
subject by an indefinite il; as, Il suffisait un mot, ‘There
sufficed a word.’ The pronoun was originally doubled only where it was
specially emphasised, just as in uneducated conversation at the present
day we hear such forms as I says, says I. But such pronominal
reduplication must have spread, and have affected the verbal forms when
they were completely formed, just as it, at an earlier period, affected
the tense-stems. It is, however, by this time so far forgotten that the
termination of such a word as legit represents a personal pronoun,
that its most common use is to indicate its relationship with the
subject by mere concord; as Pater legit, lit. ‘Father read--he,’
i.e. ‘father reads.’ In fact, the personal endings at the present day
merely serve to mark the verb as such, and sometimes to express the
difference between different moods.
In the case of nouns, the concord of gender and number, at any rate, is
first formed in the pronoun to which reference is made, to which gender,
too, owes its origin, as in such cases as illæ mulieres, ‘those women
(nom.);’ illas mulieres (acc.).
Concord in case appears first in apposition; as, Imperatoris Cæsaris
exercitus, ‘The army of Cæsar (gen.) the commander (gen.),’ where it
serves to show that both nouns have the same relation to exercitus.
But here there is no more actual necessity for employing the case-ending
twice, than there is for repeating the pronominal suffix in the case of
the verb. This we may see in such cases as King Arthur’s seat; La
gloire de la nation française, ‘The glory of the French nation.’ A
concord in gender and number occurs, even at the present day, only where
it is demanded by the nature of the case; as, La dame sur le visage de
laquelle les grâces étaient peintes (Fénelon), ‘The lady on the face of
whom the graces were painted.’
The concord of substantives in apposition having been the first to form
itself--as in Cæsaris imperatoris Romani, ‘Of Cæsar (gen.) the
Roman-commander (gen.)’--we must suppose the concord of the attributival
and predicatival adjective to have been modelled upon that use; as,
Cæsaris domini potentis, ‘Of Cæsar (gen.) the powerful master (gen.),’
or Cæsaris invicti, ‘Of Cæsar (gen.) unconquered (gen.).’ In other
words, their origin reaches back to a time when the adjective still
occupied the same category as the substantive, and was not yet thought
of as occupying a category of its own. The transition is marked by such
substantives as are called, in Latin grammars, Mobilia, which in the
forms of their genders resemble adjectives. Such as coquus, ‘cook’
(masc.); coqua, ‘cook’ (fem.): dominus, ‘lord;’ domina, ‘lady:’
rex, ‘king;’ regina, ‘queen.’ As these substantives passed into
adjectives, they maintained the concord, and it then came to be regarded
as of the essence of the adjective.
Language, as a rule, employs no more material than is necessary to make
the hearer or reader understand the meaning intended to be conveyed by
the speaker or writer. This statement must be taken merely generally,
for it admits of many exceptions. But, as a rule, language, like a
careful housewife, husbands its resources, and tends rather to economy
than to lavishness in their employment. Everywhere in language we meet
with forms of expression which contain just so much as is needed to make
the employer of language understood, and no more. In fact, the supply
offered by language depends on the demand, and on this alone. A
gesticulation may supply the place of a sentence; a nod, a frown, a
smile may speak as plainly as any words. Much, too, must depend upon the
situation: on the relations of the speakers to each other; their
knowledge of what is passing in each other’s minds; and their common
sentiments with regard to the subject discussed. If we consider a form
of expression which shall convey a thought under all possible conditions
to any possible hearer as the only correct standard, and measure all
other forms with that standard, then all these will appear imperfect,
or, as grammarians would say, elliptical.
Practically, however, ellipse should be assumed in a minimum of cases,
and each form of expression should be referred to its origin. Otherwise,
we must be content to regard ellipse as an essential part of language;
in fact, we shall have to regard language as habitually containing less
than ought rightly to be expressed, and hence we should have to regard
most expressions as elliptical.
We will consider first the cases in which a word or phrase is said to be
supplied from what precedes or what follows. It hardly seems that we
are justified in using the word supplied. Take such a sentence as Is
Bushy, Green, and the Earl of Wiltshire dead? (Rich. II., III. ii. 14).
We can hardly contend that in the perfectly expressed sentence we should
have to supply dead after Bushy, Green, and the Earl, etc.
Again, in such a sentence as He saw me and grew pale, it seems
unnecessary to supply he with grew pale; nor in such a combination
as in fear and hope need we supply in before hope merely because
we can also say in fear and in hope. It seems more correct to drop the
notion of supplying, and to think of single positing with plural
reference--regarding what usually is called a sentence, not as an
independent self-contained integer, but as a link in a continuous
series.
It is common to assume an ellipse in such cases as ‘the German and
French languages,’ and still more in the form ‘the German language and
the French.’ But we have really here a pair of elements standing in the
same relation to a third. That this is so, we see by the fact that there
are other languages in which the two elements are really treated as a
unity and attached as such to the third, which then becomes strictly
speaking the second. This is shown by the use of the plural. We say, for
instance, in Latin--quarta et Martia legiones (Brut. apud Cicero, ad
Fam., ii. 19), ‘the fourth (sing.) and the Martian (sing.) legions
(plur.),’ beside legio Martia quartaque, ‘the legion Martian and
fourth’ (both in Cicero); Falernum et Capuanum agros, ‘the Falernian
(sing.) and Capuan (sing.) fields (plur.)’ (Livy, xxii. 15):
Italian--le lingue Greca e Latina, ‘the languages Greek (sing.) and
Latin (sing.),’ besides la lingua Greca e Latina, ‘the language Greek
and Latin:’ in French--les langues Française et Allemande:--so, the
fourth and fifth regiments; the second and third days.
In the same way, in the case of such sentences as John writes well,
James badly, we are prone to assume an ellipse. But that the current
assumption of an ellipse cannot be always right is proved by the fact
that even in English we sometimes meet with a plural predicate: as,
‘Your sister as well as myself, said Booby, are greatly obliged’
(Fielding, J. Andr., iv. 7); ‘Old Sir John with half a dozen more are
at the door,’ (Shakespeare, 1 Henry IV. II. iv.): as against, ‘Ely, with
Richmond troubles me’ (Rich. III., IV. iii.); ‘Until her back, as well
as sides, was like to crack’ (But., Hud., II. i. 85).[178]
In Latin, we actually find this construction with the ablative absolute:
ille Antiocho, hic Mithridate pulsis, ‘the former when Antiochus, the
latter when Mithridates WERE defeated’ (Tacitus); quod tu aut illa
queri possitis, ‘what thou or she require could (the verb plural)’
(Tullia, ap. Cicero, ad Fam., iv. 5): cf.--
    ‘Not the King’s crown nor the deputed sword,
     The marshal’s truncheon nor the judge’s robe,
     Become them.’
(Shakespeare, Meas. for Meas., II. ii. 60); ‘For there nor yew nor
cypress spread their gloom’ (Th. Campbell, Theodoric). So in
French--‘Ni l’or ni la grandeur ne nous rendent heureux’ (La Fontaine),
‘Neither gold nor grandeur make us happy:’ and in Latin--‘Erant quibus
nec Senatus gloriari nec princeps possent,’ lit. ‘There were (some) of
whom neither Senate boast nor the Emperor could (plur.)’ (Plin., Pan.,
75).[179] This plural has originated from cases where the copulative
connection could be substituted without essential alteration of
meaning--as, ‘Yew and cypress spread not there their gloom,’--and has
thence been extended by analogy. In fact, for the instinct of language,
the predicate has been posited once and not twice.
In sentences like ‘I will come and do it,’ ‘Who steals my purse steals
trash’ (Othello, III. iii. 157), ‘Who was the thane lives yet’ (Macbeth,
I. iii. 109), we have instances of an element common to the principal
and subordinate sentence, and also in such sentences as ‘It is thy
sovereign speaks to thee,’ a variety of sentences constructed ἀπὸ
κοινοῦ. Sometimes also, in German, we find such sentences as Was ich da
träumend jauchzt und litt, muss wachend nun erfahren (Goethe), lit.
‘What I there dreaming cheered-at and suffered must waking now
experience;’ with which we may compare sentences like Milton’s ‘Thou art
my son beloved: in him am pleased,’ and ‘Here’s a young maid with travel
much oppressed, and faints for succour’[180] (Shakespeare, As You Like
It, II. iv. 75). It occurs frequently in dialogue that words of one
speaker are not repeated by another, and they are ordinarily described
as being supplied. Really, however, dialogue must be regarded as a
continuous whole, so that, e.g., the words of one speaker (or their
contents) form subject to predicate uttered by the other. Cf.--
              ‘O Banquo, Banquo!
    Our royal master’s murdered----
      (Lady Macb.) Woe! alas!
    What, in our house?’
If we take a sentence like ‘my relatives and friends,’ the common
element my stands at the outset of the whole sentence; it is then
nearer indeed to relatives, but is without difficulty referred to
friends. But insertion in the second part of the sentence is also
possible: cf. ‘It (i.e. love) shall be (too) sparing and too severe’
(Ven. and Adon., 1155), ‘Beggars (sitting) in their stocks refuge their
shame that (i.e. because) many have (sat) and many must sit there’
(Rich. II., V. v. 27); ‘of such dainty and such picking grievances’ (2
Hen. IV., IV. i. 198).[181] In this case, the first portion of the
sentence remains incomplete until the common element has been spoken or
written; and this serves to complete the first and the second part of
the sentence simultaneously.
Sometimes the common element stands in different relations to the two
others with which it is connected. Then concord must be violated: and
different languages try to avoid this breach of concord in different
ways.
We, in English, admit the want of concord in such cases as ‘She LOVES
him not less than I (LOVE him);’ ‘He thinks so: not I;’ ‘They are going
to-morrow: I too.’ The case is similar in French: Vous partez--moi
aussi ( ‘You depart--me also’); and in German, Du gehst--ich auch (
‘Thou goest--I too’). The sequence of tenses is not observed in
‘Therefore they thought it good you hear a play’ (Tam. of Shrew,
Introduc. ii. 136);[182] ‘’Twere good you do so much for charity’
(Merch. of Ven., IV. i. 261). The infinitive has to be borrowed from the
finite verb in cases like ‘He has done as he was bound;’ ‘He is gone
where he was told.’
It is, of course, harder to find cases of discord in gender in English
than in more highly inflected languages. In French, however, we find
Paul et Virginie étaient ignorants (B. de S. Pierre), ‘Paul and
Virginia were ignorant [masc. plur.]:’ and also Le fer, le bandeau et
la flamme est toute prête (Racine), ‘The iron, the bandage and the
flame is quite ready;’ C’est un homme ou une femme noyée (Boniface),
‘It is a man or a woman drowned (sing. fem.):’ cf. Lat. Visæ nocturno
tempore faces ardorque cœli (Cicero, Cat., iii. 8). The case is similar
in Italian and Spanish. In English, we find such sentences as ‘I am
happy to hear it was his horse and not himself who fell in the
combat.’[183]
A single word may actually stand in relation to two or more verbs, and
represent two or more cases; as, which (accusative to spit and
nominative to is), however, they pretend to spit wholly out of
themselves, is improved by the same arts (Swift, Battle of the Books,
p. 29, Cassell’s Edit.): so in Latin--Quibus insputari solitumst atque
iis profuit (Plaut., Captivi), ‘On whom it is customary that it should
be spat, and (this) has been good for them.’
In Latin, again, we find a nominative actually representing an
accusative; as, Qui fatetur ... et ... non timeo (Cicero)  ‘Who
confesses ... and ... (whom) I do not fear:’ and, again, a dative
represents an accusative in Cui fidem habent et bene rebus suis
consulere arbitrantur (Cicero), ‘In whom they trust and whom they deem
to manage their affairs well.’
There are, again, cases in which the two principal notions are connected
by a link which serves to define more closely the nature of the
connection. Such links are often dispensed with, as in Hectoris
Andromache, Cæcilia Metelli; or, The Duke of Westminster’s Ormonde.
It is misleading, in such cases, to say that uxor, ‘wife,’ or filia,
‘daughter,’ or colt is to be supplied; indeed, no definite
expression of the kind could be supplied unless the hearer or reader
were conversant with the situation; and even then it does not follow
that any one of the three words which we have mentioned would actually
be supplied. The truth is that the genitive, in these cases, denotes a
connection which may be rendered more definite as our knowledge of the
situation becomes more intimate.
Indications of direction were no doubt originally associated with verbs
of motion only; as, I am going thither. But they are now found
attached to verbs of preparing, wishing and the like: as, Wo wollen sie
hin?  ‘Where will you to?’ ( ‘Whither will you?’  ‘Whither are you
going?’); He purposeth to Athens (Shakespeare, Ant. and Cleo., III. i.
35); I must to Coventry (Rich. II., I. ii. 56); To Cabin! silence,
(Temp., I. i.); To horse! to horse! (Rich. II., II. i.); Back to thy
punishment, false fugitive; Forward, brave champions, to the fight
(Scott, Lay of Last Minstrel, v. 20); And thou shalt back to France
(Marlowe, Edward II., I. i.); Let us across the country to Terracina
(Bulwer, Rienzi, iii. 1).[184] Similarly, the common Scottish phrase to
want in, for to wish to enter. In these cases, we must suppose that
the notions of preparing, wishing, etc., and of the terminus ad quem
present themselves at once to our consciousness, and that they are
directly connected as psychological subject and predicate. Then the
ordinary construction in such cases, as, They are going home, or to
Rome, occurred to the recollection, and the analogy of this form of
expression co-operated to produce the form in question. The form has now
become so usual that it cannot fairly be described as elliptical. Other
similar phrases are I never let him from home; I will not let you
out; Let me in; and, again, such as He is away, or He is off to
Paris; in which case away and off to Paris are to be taken as
predicates, and is as copula. With this construction may be classed
the so-called constructio prægnans, like conditus in nubem (Vergil,
Georgics, I. 442)  ‘Hidden into a cloud,’ i.e. ‘Having passed into a
cloud and hidden itself.’
In Latin, a nominative case standing as subject is sometimes followed by
an accusative standing without a verb; as, Cicero Cassio salutem,
‘Cicero to Cassius greeting:’ similarly, Unde mihi tam fortem?
(Horace, Sat., II. v. 102); sus Minervam; fortes fortuna; dii
meliora (Cicero, Phil., viii. 3); Di vostram fidem (Plaut., Captivi,
591).
In these cases, two notions are combined in the form of nominative and
accusative because they stand in the same relation to each other as, in
a more complete sentence, obtains between subject and predicate.
Similarly, in French, we find expressions like Vite un flambeau!
(Racine), ‘Quick! a torch;’ Citoyens, trève à cette dispute!
(Ponsard), ‘Citizens, enough of this dispute.’
Sometimes, again, a nominative standing as subject is connected with an
adverb; as, hæc hactenus, ‘this so far;’ an tu id melius? ‘or (do
you know) this better?’ ne quid temere, ‘nothing rash;’ ne quid
nimis, ‘nothing too-much;’ ταῦτα μὲν οὖν δὲ ὁὗτως ( ‘that thou
therefore thus’) (Plato). Similarly, we find in English, one step
enough for me (Newman’s hymn, ‘Lead Kindly Light’). Many instances of
such constructions may be found in Pepys’ Diary; as, I to bed, etc.
Sometimes we meet with sentences like I will give you an example how to
do the thing. In this case, the subordinate sentence is combined with a
principal sentence without some element of the sentence like, of how
or as how you should do it. Thus we find sentences like the
following:[185] To talk to a man in a state of moral corruption to
elevate himself. Then sentences like You look what is the matter;
where the sentence, if fully expressed, would be Look to see what is
the matter. Similarly, in Greek, Ὅρη δίφρον, Εὐνόα, αὐτᾷ (Theoc.,
Idyll., xv. 2), ‘Look (for) a chair for her.’ Similarly, we have such
phrases as As far as that goes; As far as I know; To be plain:
and, again, such compressed sentences as in short; quant à cela (‘as
for that’), etc.
In cases like to the right, to the left, the situation again stands
instead of a substantive. Just so, in Latin, calida frigida
(aqua),[186] ‘warm, cold (i.e. water):’ Hot or cold? (with
reference to refreshments); Burgundy, Champagne; agnina, caprina
(caro), ‘lamb, goat (i.e. flesh);’ Appia (via), ‘Appian (road);’
Martia (aqua), ‘Martian (water);’ une première représentation, ‘a
first performance;’ a tenth; the Russian, French (language); la
Marseillaise. In these cases, if we speak of ellipse at all, we must
remember that we could not in many cases supply the ellipse without the
situation. If we were to say, Bring the old instead of the new, this
would be meaningless unless we had the wine before us: unless, indeed,
we had something else, as clothes, for instance, in which case
likewise the situation would supply the sense required. The more ‘usual’
such ways of speech become, the less do they depend on the situation.
When we speak of Champagne, Bordeaux, Gruyère, etc., the word has
passed from the position of an epithet into that of a true substantive.
In the case of genitive determinants, we meet with a similar
development. An Oxford student would have no difficulty in understanding
what was meant by We were beaten by St. John’s (College), nor a
medical man by I am house surgeon at St. George’s. Similarly, we find
in French la Saint Pierre (fête), ‘S. Peter’s (day);’ and, in Latin,
ad Vestæ (templum), ‘to Vesta’s (temple);’ and in German, Heut ist
Simon und Juda’s, ‘To-day is Simon and Juda’s (feast)’ (Sch.). In these
cases, no ellipse can be assumed, for it is evident that the words are
already apprehended as simple substantives.
In such forms as No further! the psychological predicate alone is
expressed, the unexpressed subject being the person to whom the words
are addressed. We may gather that these words are apprehended as in the
accusative case from parallel instances in other languages; as Cotta
finem, ‘Cotta (made) an end;’ Keinen schritt weiter, No step
further! It is the same with sentences like Good day, My best
thanks, Bon voyage (‘Pleasant trip!’), etc. In sentences like
Christianos ad leones (‘The Christians to the lions’) or Manum de
tabula (‘Hand from table’), we might certainly take Christianos and
manum as the psychological subject, and ad leones or de tabula as
the predicate; but the accusative in Christianos and manum shows
that a subject is really conceived of as taken from the situation, and
that manum, Christianos, are regarded as the object of such subject.
It is the same with cases: as, Ultro istum a me (Plautus),
‘Spontaneously him from me;’ Ex pede Herculem, ‘From foot Hercules;’
Ex ungue leonem, ‘From claw the lion;’ Malam illi pestem, ‘To him
the plague’ (Cicero); Tiberium in Tiberim (Suet., Tib., 75), ‘Tiberius
into the Tiber.’ In German we have cases like Den kopf in die höhe 
‘(The) head into the height’  ‘Heads up!’ and, in English, probably
such cases as Heads up! Hands down! are conceived of as in the
accusative case. Other cases also, as well as adverbs, can be thus used:
as, Sed de hoc alio loco pluribus  ‘But more of this hereafter;’ Hæc
nimis iracunde  ‘This too angrily.’ Similarly, So Gareth to him
(Tennyson, Gareth and Lynette, p. 47); Whereat the maiden petulant
(ibid., p. 77).
Sometimes, as in the rhetorical figure which we call aposiopesis, the
psychological predicate as well is taken from the situation; in this
case gesticulation and the tone of the speaker may do much to promote
the clearness of the situation. Thus we have suppressed threats, like
the well-known Vergilian, Quos ego (Æn., i. 135), ‘Whom I!’[187]
Again, we find such expressions as, To be thus is nothing, but to be
safely thus (is something).[188] Again, take such expressions as the
wretch! A maid and be so martial! (Shakespeare, 1 Hen. VI., I. iv.);
and, again, exclamations such as So young and so depraved! To sleep
so long! and, To throw me plumply aside! (Coleridge, Picc., i. 2).
Under this head will come the so-called Infinitive of exclamation in
Latin. Hunccine solem tam nigrum surrexe mihi (Horace, Sat., I. ix.
72), ‘Oh that this wretched day (black sun) has risen for me!’ This use
is also very common in French; as, Enfoncer ce couteau moi-même, chose
horrible (Ponsard),[189] ‘To plunge this knife (into him) myself,
horrible notion!’
Similarly, dependent sentences may become by us independent; as, ‘O
that this too too solid flesh would melt!’ If I only knew! O had we
some bright little isle of our own! (T. Moore). This use is similar in
Anglo-Saxon.[190]
It is similar when conditional sentences are used as threats; as, If
you only dare! Verbum si Addideris! (Terence), ‘If you say another
word!’--or when such are set down and left uncompleted; as, But if he
doesn’t come after all! French is full of parallels: cf. Et quand je
pense que j’ai été plusieurs fois demander des messes à ce magicien
d’Urbain (De Vigny), ‘And if I consider that I have several times asked
this conjurer Urbain for masses!’ Puisque je suis là, si nous
liquidions un peu ce vieux compte (Daudet), ‘As I am here (what) if we
settled this old account?’ C’est à peine si ma tête entre dans ce
chapeau (Acad.), ‘It is (only) with difficulty if my head gets into
this hat;’ Passez votre chemin, mon ami. Que je passe mon chemin? Oui,
qui, qui le pourrait (Regnard)  ‘Go on, my friend!--I, go on?--Yes,
yes, if it were possible.’ These sentences with that are originally
predicates; or, speaking from a grammatical point of view, objects.
That I might be there to see! if fully expressed, would be I wish
that I could be there to see. Cf. I am the best of them that speak
this speech, Were I but where ’tis spoken (Shakespeare, Tempest, I.
ii.); Those other two equalled with me in fate, so were I equalled with
them in renown (Milton, Par. Lost, iii. 33); Would to God we had died
by the hand of the Lord (Exod. xvi. 3).
We have in former chapters dealt with, and frequently alluded to, the
fact that much which is new in derivation and inflection is due to
analogy. Much is due to this, but not all; and we must now ask whence
originated these processes of derivation and flection, which cannot be
explained as due to analogy, i.e. those which, instead of being
moulded on a given pattern, have, on the contrary, served as the model
for others. It is clear that as soon as language arose, even in its most
primitive state, words must have been combined syntactically, in however
simple a manner. Groups of etymologically connected words, words derived
the one from the other by suffixes (as long, length; king,
kingdom) or by flection (as book, books; go, goes),--such
groups need not have existed at once, nay, must have arisen only
gradually, and in course of time. How did they arise? Theoretically,
three ways only seem possible.
Words formed independently for cognate ideas, might accidentally
resemble each other so closely as to group themselves also phonetically,
i.e. to be sounded more or less alike; or--what is essentially the
same, though not quite so improbable--words originally different and
expressing different ideas, might, in course of time, so develop in
meaning and sound as to become members of a group. A case somewhat of
this nature we studied in our word bound (cf. page 194), which,
originally different in sound and form from the then existing past
participle of to bind, has come to resemble it so much in form, and
was used in such a sense as to cause all but students of language to
group these forms together.
A second way is a differentiation in sound, i.e. two forms may arise,
under the influence of accent or other causes, from the same word, which
two forms then come to be differentiated in meaning. We have in this
way, for instance, the two forms of the past tense of the verb werden
(to become) in German, ward and wurde. These arose absolutely
independently of any difference in meaning; once having arisen, a custom
sprang up of using the one (ward) as aorist and the other (wurde) by
preference as imperfect tense.
That in the above examples, the form which later on became bound is
not itself an original creation, or that, in German, the two forms of
the past tense were due largely to analogy, does not affect their value
as illustrative of our point. We readily understand that both these ways
were and are possible, but, at the same time, that in only very few
cases they have been followed.
Only one way of explaining the origin of flection
remains--‘composition.’
In order to explain how derivation and flection can have been derived
from composition, we will go somewhat deeply into the nature and
application of the latter. We shall then see how impossible it is to
draw a sharp line between syntactical co-ordination, composition,
derivation, and flection anywhere, and then--and only then--we shall
acquire an insight into the true nature of the subject of this chapter.
If we study the composition of words in the various Indo-European
languages, we soon learn to distinguish two different kinds. In one we
find the so-called crude forms (that is to say, those forms of the words
which, WITH THE CASE-ENDINGS, make up what we now consider the complete
word) combined with other crude forms, the last of which alone assumes
these case-endings. To illustrate this we must of course go back to
ancient languages, in which this crude form is clearly distinct from the
nominative or any other case. We have plenty of such compounds even now
in English and other modern languages; but, in consequence of the
wearing off of terminations, the most undoubted examples would
illustrate (i.e. throw light upon) nothing. In Sanscrit, for instance,
there are three plants which in the nominative singular would be called
çaças (or çaçaḥ), kuças (ḥ) or kuçam (masc. or neut.), and
palâçam. It is the crude forms of these nouns (without their
nominative--s and m) which are used in the compound
çaça-kuça-palâçam, which indicates a collection of the three. Again
râjâ (with long â) is the nominative form of a stem râjan (‘king’)
or râja (with short a). In the compound râja-purushas (h) we again
find the crude form, this time the shorter form of the base: purushas
means ‘man’ and the whole ( ‘king-man’) stands for king’s man. We
might illustrate this kind by such words as our tragi-comic,
melodramatic (melos  ‘song’).
In the other kind of compounds we find two or more fully inflected forms
combined in one group. This is the method of composition which survives
in our present linguistic consciousness, which sees compounds of the
second kind even in those which are historically connected with the
Indo-European type, illustrated in the former paragraph by
râja-purushas. The wearing off of well-nigh all case-endings has in
the present language almost completely obliterated the difference
between crude forms and nominatives of nouns and adjectives or the
infinitives of verbs. Hence, at present, the ordinary speaker realises
no difference between, e.g., noon in noon-tide and the word noon
in It is noon. Yet the compound noon-tide belongs historically to
the former class, and noon is there a ‘crude form,’ if we may still so
call it. In our following study of composition as at present employed in
the English language, we neglect the scientific origin, but base our
classification on appearance; in the present case, on present linguistic
consciousness. One of the fullest and best-known lists of compounds in
the English language is perhaps that given by Morris (Histor. Outlines,
p. 222). We shall largely draw upon it in the following study, though we
have, in our enumeration, rather considered the character of the
component parts than, as Mr. Morris does, that of the function of the
compound.
I. Nouns are compounded with Nouns--
1. Both in the same case; i.e. in apposition, the one explanatory of,
or defining the other (in which case one of the nouns has a function
almost, if not quite, identical with that of an adjective). Instances
are spear-plant, noon-tide, church-yard, headman, oak-tree,
master-tailor, merchant-tailor, prince-regent, water-course,
watershed, head-waiter, plough-boy, bishopdom (found in Milton,
dom  ‘jurisdiction’), bishopric (ric  A.S. rîce, ‘power,’
‘domain’), bandog ( band + dog), barn (bere, i.e. barley +
ern, i.e. ‘storehouse’), bridegroom (bride + groom  goom 
A.S. guma, ‘man’[191]), bridal (bride + ale  ‘bride-feast’),
cowslip (cow + slip, A.S. cu-slyppe  ‘cow dung’), hussy (
‘house-wife’--Skeat, Prin. Eng. Etymol., p. 422), Lord-lieutenant,
earlmarshal, wer-wolf (‘man-wolf,’ A.S. wer  ‘a man’), world
(weoruld, wer  ‘man’ + ældu  ‘age,’ ‘old age,’ ‘age of man’),
yeoman ( ‘village-man’--see Skeat), orchard (A.S. orceard,
ortgeard, metathesis  wort-yard  ‘vegetable-garden’), Lammas (
hláf-maesse  ‘loaf-mass,’ ‘day of offering,’ ‘first-fruits’),
handi-work (hand + geweorc  ‘hand-work’), mildew ( ‘honey
dew,’ mil  ‘honey,’ A.S. mele), penny-worth.
2. Genitive + Nominative. Doomsday, Thursday, Tuesday (day of
Tiw, the godhead), kinsman, trades-union, calf’s-foot
(calf’s-foot jelly), lady day (lady as a feminine had no s in the
genitive), daisy (‘day’s eye,’ A.S. dæges 4 éage), Wednesday
(‘Wodan’s day’), shilling’s-worth.
3. Noun + Verbal Noun (the former having the function of object to the
verb cognate with the latter). Man-killer, blood-shedding, auger
(i.e. ‘nauger,’ a nauger having been divided as if  an auger; A.S.
nafu-gár, ‘nave (of a wheel)’ ‘-borer,’ ‘-piercer’), groundsel (A.S.
grunde + swelge  ‘ground-swallower’  ‘abundant weed;’ already in
the Saxon corrupted from gunde-swilge  ‘poison-swallower,’ with
reference to healing effects),[192] lady (hláf-dige,
‘loaf-kneader’), soothsayer ( ‘truth-speaker’).
4. Two Nouns in other relations: nightingale (A.S. nihte-gale 
‘night-singer’), nightmare (mara, ‘an incubus,’ by night).
II. Nouns are compounded with Adjectives.
1. Adjective and Substantive.
a. Nouns. Nobleman, upperhand, good-day, sometime,
meanwhile, freeman, blackbird, long-measure, weet-william,
lucky-bag, midday, alderman (ealdor-man  ‘elder-man’), Gospel
(god-spell  ‘good-spell’  ‘good tiding’), holiday ( ‘holy day’),
halibut ( ‘holy but’  ‘holy plaice for eating on holy days’),
hoar-frost, hoar-hound (the hoar or greyish húna, i.e. the plant
now called horehound), hind-leg, neighbour ( ‘near-dweller’),
midriff (mid + hrif  belly), titmouse (small sparrow; mouse
here  A.S. máse, small bird, not the A.S. mûs from which the common
word mouse).
b. Adjectives. Barefoot.
2. Substantive and Adjective.
a. Nouns. Furlong ( ‘furrow long’  ‘the length of a furrow’).
b. Adjectives. In many of these the noun has very much the functions
of an adverb. Blood-red, snow-white, fire-proof, shameful,
beautiful, manly (i.e. ‘man-like’), scot-free (free from paying
scot, i.e. a contribution).
3. Substantive and Participle.
a. Earth-shaking, heart-rending, life-giving, blood-curdling.
b. Airfed, earthborn, moth-eaten.[193]
4. Numeral + Substantive.
Sennight ( ‘seven night’), fortnight (‘fourteen night’),
twi-light ( ‘double light’  ‘doubtful light’).
III. Pronoun and Substantive. Self-will, self-esteem.
IV. 1. Substantive and Verb (or Verbal Stem).
Verbs. Back-bite, blood-let, brow-beat, hoodwink, caterwaul (
‘to wail like cats’).
2. Verb and Substantive.
Nouns. Grindstone, bakehouse, wash-tub, pickpocket, brimstone
(i.e. brenstone  ‘burning stone’), rearmouse (hrére-mús,
hreran, ‘to flutter’), wormwood (A.S. wermód  weremód,
werian, ‘to defend,’ mód  ‘mood’  ‘mind;’ ‘that which preserves
the mind’), breakfast, spend-thrift (cf. wast-thrift--Middleton, A
Trick to Catche the Old One, II. i.).
V. Adjective + Adjective (or Adverb + Adjective; it is not always
possible to decide which).
1. Old-English, Low-German, deaf-mute, thrice-miserable.
2. Adjective (or Adverb) + Participle.
a. Deep-musing, fresh-looking, ill-looking.
b. Dear-bought, full-fed, high-born, dead-beat.
(In well-bred, well-disposed, etc., there is, of course, no doubt
that the first element is an adverb.)
VI. Adjective and Verb. White-wash.
VII. Adverb and Verb. Cross-question, doff (do-off), don (do-on).
Further compounds we meet are made up of--
VIII. Pronouns with Pronouns. Somewhat.
IX. Adverbs with Adverbs. Each ( á (aye) + gelic  like, A.S.
aelc).
X. Adverbs with Pronouns. None ( ne + one), naught ( ne +
aught).
XI. Adverbs with Prepositions. Therefrom.
XII. Adverbs with Adverbs. Henceforth, forthwith.
XIII. Prepositions with their Case. Downstairs, uphill, instead.
XIV. Adverbs with Verbs. Foretell, gainsay, withstand, etc.
We also find more than two members formed into one; such as
man-o’-war, will-o’-the-wisp, brother-in-law, nevertheless,
whatsoever, etc. Sentences and phrases coalesce; as in good-bye (
‘God be with you’), the provincial beleddy ( ‘By our lady,’ i.e.
the Virgin Mary), may-be (provincially in America written mebbe),
and, aided by metaphorical usage, forget-me-not, kiss-me-quick, etc.
The student should carefully go over these examples, and, in each of
them, attentively study the full force of the compound, and see what is
really expressed by the component part, and what implied by the mere
fact that they are thus joined.[194] If he is acquainted with any
foreign languages, he should also study all the various habits of these
languages as regards composition. He will then gain a clear insight into
the nature of the process, and see how impossible it is to fix a line of
demarcation between compounds and syntactical combinations. This is
further illustrated by the fact that much, which in one language is
looked upon as a compound, in another is kept asunder; nay, in the same
language one calls a compound what the other would count as two distinct
words. Thus a German writes derselbe ( ‘the self,’ i.e. ‘the same’)
as one word, whereas an Englishman writes the same; an Englishman
writes himself where the German has, in two words, sich selbst. Cf.
the Eng. long-measure with the Ger. langenmass; the Fr. malheureux
(from malum augurium, ‘evil omen’) with the Eng. ill-starred, etc.
It is this uncertainty, this vacillation, to which we owe the compromise
of writing such combinations with a hyphen; e.g., a good-for-nothing.
Though even this usage is not fixed and invariable; for one author will
write, e.g., head-dress, another headdress, etc.
If there is no line of logical demarcation between compound and
syntactical groups, no more is there a phonetic one. Misled by the fact
that the words of a syntactical group are written asunder, and a
compound written as one word, we might think that the members of such a
compound were pronounced as though more intimately connected than those
of a syntactical group. But combinations like those of article and noun,
preposition and noun, are really pronounced as one continuous whole as
much as any compound. Nor is there an essential difference in the
accent, either in place or in force. Compare, for instance, with him
and withstand or withdraw; the degree of strength (or perhaps rather
the absence) of emphasis on the first word in Lord Randolph, Lord
Salisbury, with that on the last ‘syllable’ in landlord; or, again,
the quantity of stress we give to the preposition in the expression in
my opinion with that on the first syllable of insertion. If the
example of Lord Randolph v. landlord seemed to show that the PLACE
of the accent has some significance, we have but to read the sentences
Not Lord Randolph but Lady R. Churchill, or Not the landlord but the
landlady spoke to the lodger, to find the accents in exactly the
opposite relations and places. No special place of accent, then, is
characteristic of a compound. A very instructive example we have in the
compound Newfoundland. This is actually pronounced by various speakers
in three different ways: one says Néwfoundland, another
Newfóundland, and, again, another Newfoundlánd. What, then, makes
every one feel this word, in all three pronunciations, to be compound?
Nothing physiological, but simply and solely the psychological fact that
the meaning of the group new-found-land has become specialised, and
no longer corresponds to what once would have been a perfectly
equivalent group, land-newly-discovered. Semasiological development
and isolation is the criterion of a compound. What degree of such
isolation is required cannot be stated in any hard and fast rule.
Such isolation can be effected in four different ways. (1) In the first
place, the whole group, as such, can develop its meaning in a manner, or
to a degree, not shared by the compound members. An example of this we
saw just now in Newfoundland. (2) Or, again, the component parts, as
separate words, may develop and change their meaning, without being
followed in that development by the same words as part of the group.
Thus, e.g., with originally meant against. This meaning it still has
in withstand, whilst as a separate word it is not now used in that
meaning. (3) Thirdly, the compound parts may become obsolete as separate
words; as, for instance, ric in ‘bishopric’ (cf. supra, p. 317). (4)
And lastly, the peculiar construction according to which the parts are
connected or combined may become obsolete, surviving only in the
formula, which thus becomes isolated. Thus, e.g., the genitive
singular of feminine nouns can no longer be formed without s; hence
Lady-day is now felt as a compound word, whilst ladies’-cloak or
ladies’-house would not be so felt.
Though such isolation is necessary and may suffice to stamp a group as
compound, we must not conclude that every group, where such isolation in
one way or another has commenced, is ipso facto looked upon as a
compound. Many considerations are here of importance, some of which will
be brought out in a further study of some examples in which we can
observe the commencement of the fusion.
The first step which a syntactical group takes on the road towards
complete isolation and consequent fusion into a compound, is commonly
the one we described under No. 1. in the former section. We must here
distinguish two cases, which, though perhaps not easily distinguished
in words, are yet clearly different.
An example will best serve to explain it. We have already more than once
stated that in Lady-day the grammatical isolation of the genitive
lady, as against the present genitive lady’s, serves to emphasise
the fusion of the two parts into one compound. But we must not forget
that this form of the genitive in this combination would not have been
preserved if, at the time when the word lady by itself began to assume
the genitive s--or, rather, began to follow analogically other
genitives in s,--if, we say, the compound had not then already been
isolated to a sufficient degree to protect the first component part
against the influence which affected it when standing in other
combinations. The absence of the s is therefore NOT the CAUSE of the
isolation of the group, or the fusion of its parts. We must seek for
that cause most likely in the fact that the genitive was, in this
combination, used in a sense which always was or had become unusual.
Lady-day, even when the form lady was still felt as genitive, would
but mean ‘the day consecrated to the service of our Lady,’ or ‘the day
sacred to our Lady.’ Now this use of the genitive must always have been
an exceptional one. Never, for instance, could a man’s book or a
lady’s cloak have had a similar meaning. It was therefore at first not
so much the meaning of the component parts, as the MEANING EXPRESSED BY
THEIR SYNTACTICAL CO-ORDINATION, which stood apart and became isolated.
We see something of the same influence if we compare St. John’s wood
and St. John’s Church. In the second group, the latter of the
component parts has a meaning which suggests and helps to keep alive
the correct meaning of the genitive-relation expressed by the flection
of the former part. In St. John’s wood this is not so. This compound
is therefore felt to be more intimately fused together than the other,
and, while every one who uses the expression St. John’s Church thinks
of the Saint who bore the name of John, but few speakers will do so in
speaking of St. John’s wood. There is a very clear instance of this at
hand in the German Hungersnot, lit.  hungersneed, i.e. ‘famine’
(need, suffering caused by hunger). Here the genitive with the word
need has a very special sense, which, e.g., could not be expressed
by the otherwise equivalent construction with of. ‘The need of
hunger,’ if ever used in German, would be a very forced and uncommon way
of expressing the idea ‘famine,’ a way which only a poet could adopt
(die Not des Hungers). Here, then, again, it is not the sense of the
words, but the sense of their syntactical relation which stands
isolated.
On the other hand, if we consider forms like upstairs, always,
altogether, we shall find that it is not this relation, but the whole
meaning of the group as such, which has become isolated by development
or specialisation of meaning. Upstairs has become equivalent to ‘on a
floor of the building higher than we are now;’ always has been
extended so as to include the relation of time, etc. This development
has then generally given rise to what grammarians term ‘indeclinabilia,’
which sometimes, by secondary development have become capable of
flection. Thus the German preposition zu (to, at), and the dative case
frieden (peace), in a sentence like Ich bin zufrieden, gave rise to
the compound zufrieden (lit.  ‘at peace’), ‘contented.’ When once the
prepositional phrase at peace had developed into the adjective
content, the compound was declined like other adjectives: ein
zufriedener mann  ‘a contented man;’ etc.
Again, when the groups round-about and go-between had become nouns,
they could be treated as such, and we find the plurals round-abouts
and go-betweens.
The more highly a language is inflected, the less liable will the parts
of a syntactical group be to fuse into one. It is much easier for a
combination like Greenland or Newfoundland to pass into a real
compound than for one like the German (das) rote Meer, ‘(the) Red
Sea,’ though the amount of isolation of meaning is the same in both.
Whether the group Green + land is nominative or dative or genitive,
no change in the form of green occurs; in German, das rote Meer is
nominative, des roten Meeres is genitive, dem roten Meer is dative.
Every time one of the two latter cases is used, the addition of the
flection n reminds us of the independence of the two words rot and
Meer.
Just as by means of suffixes, etc., we derive new words from others,
whether the latter are simple or compound forms (love, love-able;
for-get, forget-able; etc.), so we sometimes find whole syntactical
groups, which are not yet considered as having been fused into one
compound, used with similar suffixes. Instances are:
good-for-nothingness, a stand-off-ishness, a devil-may-carish
face; That fellow is such a go-a-header; He is not get-at-able,
etc., which no doubt scarcely belong to the literary language, but which
show that the linguistic feeling of the speaker must have already
apprehended these groups as unities; in other words, that the first step
on the road towards welding them into a compound has been taken. A
well-established instance appears in our ordinal numerals, such as
one-and-twentieth, five-and-fortieth, etc.
A similar commencement of fusion we can observe in copulative
combinations like wind and weather or town and country, as soon as
the whole may be conceived as a single conception. In wind and weather
this is the case, the two terms being in this combination SYNONYMOUS,
describing the same object from different points of view. Other
instances of this we have in bag and baggage, kith and kin, moil
and toil, safe and sound, first and foremost, house and home,
far and wide.[195] In town and country, on the other hand, we have
two elements which, whilst CONTRASTING, supplement one another. Such
groups are old and young, heaven and hell, gown and town, big and
small, rich and poor, hither and thither, to and fro, up and
down, in and out. In a few, the same member is repeated; as, out and
out, through and through, again and again, little by little. A
careful consideration of the real meaning of such groups will show that,
strictly speaking, these form a subdivision of our second class.
Inflected languages like German afford a criterion not applicable to
English, as to the fusion of such combinations. We find there, for
instance, a group--Habe und Gut (Etymol.  have, as a noun, for
‘property,’ and good  ‘chattels’), for ‘all a man’s possessions.’ The
first of these nouns is feminine, and consequently ‘with all (his)
belongings’ would be ‘mit aller Habe;’ Gut, on the other hand, is
neuter, and requires the form (dative after mit) ‘mit allem Gut.’
Goethe has treated the group Hab’ und Gut as a neuter noun, and
written ‘mit allem mobilen Hab’ und Gut’ (‘with all movable
possessions’).
We have seen that groups like one and twenty, five and forty, etc.,
were really far advanced on the way of fusion, as was shown by the
formation of the corresponding ordinals. In the case of those which
begin with one, we have a further proof of this in the use of the
plural noun, e.g. ‘one and twenty men.’
It will be readily felt that in expressions like a black and white
dog, the group black and white really is in a similar state of
fusion. We have but to separate the parts into two really independent
words by the insertion of a second indefinite article, to see at once
that ‘black and white’ is the description of one quality of one
object, a compound word to express one (though not psychologically
simple) conception.
So, again, the group one and all is sufficiently welded into one to
resist, e.g., the insertion of the preposition of before its second
part. Thus we should say It was for the good of one and all (i.e. for
the entire community) and not of one and of all.
We may assume that complete fusion between the parts of such copulative
groups would be more common if it were not checked by the connecting
particle and. In some of the most common of these the accent of and
has become so much depressed that the word becomes almost inaudible: cf.
hare and hounds, half and half, etc. In combinations where the
connecting particle has become unrecognisable in consequence of such
phonetic sinking, it no longer resists the fusion. Thus, Jackanapes
has become to all intents and purposes one word. It stands[196] with the
common preposition on, instead of of (cf. the very frequent use of
this ‘on’ in Shakespeare and contemporaries), for Jack-of-apes, i.e.,
originally, ‘the man of the (or with the) [performing] apes,’ just as
Jack-a-lantern stands for ‘Jack of the (or with the) lantern,’ etc.
Combinations without any such connecting link pass, of course, all the
more easily into compounds: cf. Alsace-Lorraine, as against such
combinations as Naples and Sicily.
In the period of the Indo-European languages before inflections had
taken their rise, or when they were not yet indispensable, the fusion
into a ‘copulative compound’ (dvand-va) must have been simple and easy.
When a substantive has been specialised in meaning by being combined
with an attributive, as blackbird, the combination may pass through
all the changes of signification described in Chapter IV. without the
uncombined substantive as such being affected. The result is commonly to
make the combination richer in contents than the simple combination of
the parts. Thus, by ‘a blackbird’ we understand the familiar songster to
which we give the name, and no longer understand such birds as rooks,
crows, etc., which might have been classed under the name
‘blackbird.’[197] Further modifications may set in, which may cause the
epithet, strictly interpreted, to become wholly inapplicable. Thus, ‘a
butterfly’[198] is applied to a whole class of insects quite
irrespective of their colours. When we talk of the Middle Ages, we mean
a strictly defined period of time, though no such definition is involved
in the word middle. Privy Councillor denotes a definite rank; and
the idea of privacy hardly enters into our heads as we pronounce the
word: cf. also such expressions as the Holy Scriptures; the fine
Arts; cold blood; Black Monday; Passion Week; the High School;
the wise men from the East. It must be observed that the substantival
determinants are only able to fuse with the word defined if they are
employed in an abstract sense. This restriction does not, however, apply
in the case of proper names.
A subdivision of this great class of words, thus specialised, is
formed by common place-names which have become proper nouns by the aid
of some determinant, itself possibly also unspecific. Such are the Red
Sea, the Black Forest, Broadway, the Sublime Porte, the
Watergate, the Blue Mountains, High Town, Beechwood,
Broadmeadows, Coldstream, Troutbeck, Dog-island. It is similar,
too, when an epithet attached as a distinguishing mark to a proper name
comes to be apprehended as an integral portion of the proper name--in
fact, as attaching to the individual; as, Richard the Humpback,
Charles the Bald, William the Conqueror, Alexandra Land, the
Mackenzie River, Weston-super-mare.
Compare also such compounds as Oldham, Littleton, Hightown,
Lower-Austria, Great Britain.
The metaphorical application of a word is generally rendered
intelligible by the context; especially and chiefly by the addition of a
determinant: cf. ‘the head of the conspirators;’ ‘the heart of the
enterprise;’ ‘the life of the undertaking;’ ‘the sting of death.’
Similarly, a determinant forming an element in a compound helps to
render the metaphorical application intelligible; indeed, we are able by
the aid of such a determinant to give to compounds a metaphorical sense,
which we could hardly venture upon for the undetermined word alone: so,
for instance, we give the name of German-silver to a material which we
should not call merely silver; the name of sea-horse to what we
would not call a horse: cf. further, sea-cow, elder-wine,
ginger-beer, etc.
There are some cases, again, in which the compound has a proper, as well
as a metaphorical meaning, and only as a compound acquires its
metaphorical use: such are swallow-tail, negro-head, mothers’ joy,
cuckoo-spittle, woolly bear, etc.
We have now to consider how syntactical and formal isolation contributes
to further the fusion of the determinant with the determinate. If we
compare two combinations such as kinsman with man-of-war, or man of
deeds, we shall find that whilst the one has become an undoubted
composition, the others are still groups of more or less independent
parts. This is of course due to the fact that even now the word man is
inflected, and that consequently the plurals, men of war and men of
deeds, remind us of the fact that the first member of the group is an
independent word. Formerly, when the flection was far more elaborate,
this was, naturally, much more the case, and this alone would have
sufficed to establish the feeling that, in compounds, the genitive which
remained the same in all ‘cases’ of the compound had to precede. Of
course, as long as flection sufficiently indicated the cases, both
orders could be used in any group, but as then only such groups in
which the genitive did precede became ‘compounds,’ those compounds
became models, and the practice arose gradually and gradually became a
rule. Another force then came to exert its influence in the same
direction. In such genitival combinations it is, as a rule, the genitive
which has the accent. When, then, this genitive was placed first, the
whole group thereby resembled in accent the existing composites of the
oldest formation, and so was more easily considered in the same light as
these. The main cause must, however, be sought in a syntactical
isolation, i.e., in our examples, an isolation in the construction of
the article. As long as flectional terminations existed in their
entirety, the Teutonic languages could dispense with the article before
declined cases of nouns; in fact we may say the article did not exist,
the demonstrative pronoun not yet having been degraded into what it
became later on--a mere sign of case. Hence it was in old Teutonic
languages quite possible, and a frequent practice, to use the genitive
case of a noun alone without an article at all. We may be sure that this
has also been true for the other cases. Phonetic decay, however,
levelled the terminations of the other cases of a noun long before the
genitive; and accusative and dative had long been alike (or very nearly
so) at a time when in the masculine and neuter singular the genitive s
was still preserved: in fact, as we know, in English it is all that has
remained to us of the old flectional endings, with the exception of
those s’s, in the plural which are original and not due to analogy. In
that older stage of the language it was common to express an idea like
the son of man by constructions just as in Ancient Greek, where the
genitive stood between the article and the noun, which were both, of
course, in the same case. Thus we find in Old High German, ther (NOM.
SING. masc.) mannes sun ( ‘the man’s son’[199]). In Anglo-Saxon,
Heofona rice ys gelíc ðám hiredes ealdre (‘of heaven’s (the) Kingdom
is like the (DAT. sing.) household’s prince’). Gradually, however, the
use of a noun without the article, largely, no doubt, owing to the
levelling of all other cases, became more and more rare even in the
genitive. Such rare standing expressions as remained without article,
naturally assumed the appearance of compounds, and, especially in the
case where the article belonging to the second noun preceded the
genitive, the fusion was complete: the + kin’s + man became the
+ kinsman.[200]
We have already pointed out how the adjective and the noun entered into
composition, and seen how, even in many combinations which we are not
yet accustomed to look upon as fused into one, derivatives show that
this fusion has at least partly been accomplished. Such are the many
forms in ed, like black-eyed, etc., which are derived from the
groups black eye, etc., and cannot be looked upon as compounds of
black + eyed. We do not speak of an eyed person, for one who has
eyes: cf. left-handed, self-willed, one-handed, etc.
In English, especially in Scottish dialects, many adverbs which commonly
follow the verb, are occasionally made to precede it; as, to uplift,
to backslide, etc. We may gather that in such forms no composition
strictly so called has as yet set in, from the fact that the order is
frequently transposed, as in sliding back, to lift up, etc. On the
other hand, the fact that the words are joined in writing shows that the
whole has begun to be apprehended as a unity.
In the case of most of these combinations we can trace the commencement
of an isolation, which proves that the linguistic sense is ceasing to
apprehend the elements as distinct. For instance, in English the old
prepositional adverbs cannot be used independently and freely to form
new combinations at will, but are confined to a definite group of
combinations. Thus we can say, enfold and entwine: but not
enthrow, for throw in. We can talk of onset, and onslaught, but
not of on-run: of overflow, but not of over-pour. In many cases
this isolation has led to a special development of meaning, and the word
becomes still more definitely a compound; cf. such words as inroad,
after-birth, offset, over-coat. From the union of the verb with
the adverb, there arise nominal derivatives in which the sense is yet
more specialised, such as offset, output, offal, under-writer.
An adverb derived from an adjective sometimes fuses with the nominal
forms of the verb. The first impulse to this fusion is often given by
the metaphorical application of one part of the compound: cf.
deep-feeling, far-reaching, high-flying. The combination becomes
even closer when the first part retains a meaning which has become
unusual to it in general. For instance, in such a combination as
ill-favoured, ill retains a trace of the time when it could be used
as synonymous with bad.
In German, the comparative and superlative forms are actually used,
showing the completeness of the fusion; as, der tieffühlendste Geist
(Goethe), (lit.  ‘deep-feelingest ghost,’ i.e. ‘spirit’).
There are a few combinations of verbal-forms with an object accusative,
which similarly occupy an intermediate position between the compound and
the syntactic group; such as laughter-provoking, wrath-stirring,
fire-spitting. No sharp line can be drawn between these instances of
spontaneous and natural fusion, and the analogical formations coined by
the poets; as sea-encompassed, storm-tossed, etc.
Again, and even in English, where the application of the inflected
comparative and superlative is of so very limited application, it is the
use of the comparative or superlative which affords a test as to the
degree of fusion. It is, of course, possible to analyse most
laughter-provoking, as provoking much laughter. But few would adopt
such an explanation in a sentence like This is the most fire-spitting
speech I ever heard.
Besides this, there are many verbal combinations which must be
apprehended as compounds, from the fact that they represent a single
notion only; such as with regard to, as soon as possible,
forasmuch as, seeing that, none the less,--which must be
considered to stand on the same footing as notwithstanding,
nevertheless. This fusion is sometimes accompanied by a displacement
of the psychological conception as to the parts of the sentence, whereby
the natural mode of construction is altered, and the combination
performs a new function, and becomes practically a different part of
speech. For instance, we commonly hear I as good as promised it to
them, where ‘as good as’ is nearly equivalent to ‘almost,’ and is
construed like that adverb. We even meet with sentences like
unclassified and prize-cattle, where a member of a compound is placed
on the same footing as an independent word. Moreover, the first, or
determinant member of the compound may be followed by determinants, as
if it were itself independent; thus Milton can write hopeless to
circumvent us; fearless to be overmatched: as if it had been ‘without
hope to circumvent us;’ ‘having no fear to be overmatched.’ All this
shows over and over again how completely impossible it is to draw the
line between syntactical groups and compounds.
In this manner, then, syntactical isolation favours the fusion of a
group into a compound. In our discussion of the form Jackanapes, we
had already an instance how phonetic changes may have the same effect.
This we shall now investigate and illustrate rather more in detail.
Though it would be impossible to prove the fact historically, it seems
involved in the nature of the case that, for the most part, such
phonetic changes at first arose in EVERY case of such closer and more
intimate syntactical union; that they were re-adjusted and re-equalised
later on, and were only preserved in groupings which, as a consequence
of development of meaning, had become so far fused into one whole as to
be capable of resisting the re-adjusting tendencies.
The simplest of such general effects of syntactical grouping is that the
final consonant of a syllable is transferred in pronunciation to the
next syllable. Thus, for instance, an apple is pronounced a-napple,
without any pause; here + on is pronounced he + ron, etc. If,
then, as in French, this final consonant disappears from pronunciation,
save when thus made an initial, i.e. save before a word beginning with
a vowel, we may expect its presence to have an isolating effect, and
consequently to be sufficient to stamp the group as a compound. This,
however, is only the case if such a preservation is not sufficiently
frequent to be realised as a rule of pronunciation for all similar
cases. In French, il peut  ‘he can,’ is pronounced without the t;
in peut-être  ‘may be,’ ‘perhaps,’ the t is heard. Yet this has not
isolated the form peut with t from the usual third person singular
present indicative without t, because this t is preserved not in
peut-être alone, or in a few such groups, but in all cases where the
following word begins with a vowel; e.g., il peut avoir  ‘he can
(may) have,’ pronounced with the t likewise. If we suppose the French
language to discard at some time this liaison, as it is called, and
always to pronounce peut without t even before vowels, then, and not
till then, would the pronunciation peut-être with t stamp the
combination as a compound.
So, again, the well-known process of avoiding hiatus by contraction or
elision, in the case of a word ending in a vowel preceding one that
begins with a vowel, has been sufficient to fuse two elements into one
compound in many cases (e.g., about  a + be + ut (an); Lat.
magnopere  magno + opere; Gothic sah, ‘this’  sa + uh),
but has no such effect in the case of the French article, or of the
French preposition de, because the elision of the unaccented e and
a is there an almost invariable and still ‘living’ rule.
A third general effect of close syntactical combination is the
assimilation of a final and initial consonant. This, in present European
languages, is scarcely, if at all, noticed or expressed in writing. It
is, however, an exceedingly common occurrence in the spoken language,
a fact of which every one can and ought to convince himself by a little
attention to his own and other’s NATURAL pronunciation. It is only in
cases where further reasons, in addition to this assimilation, such as,
e.g., isolation by development of meaning or other phonetic
development, have welded the group into a compound, or at least have
advanced it a considerable distance on the road towards complete fusion,
that the written language sometimes takes cognisance of the change, and,
by the very spelling, indicates the compound nature of the group. We say
‘sometimes’ takes cognisance; for while spelling in no living language
follows all the variations in pronunciation, no European tongue is
further from accurately representing the spoken--that is, the
real--language in its writing than English. Hence the instances even of
acknowledged compounds, in which the assimilation in sound is indicated
by the spelling, are comparatively rare. Such are gossib, for god +
sib  ‘sib, or related, in God;’ leoman, for leof + man  ‘dear
man;’ quagmire  quakemire, i.e. ‘quaking mire.’ Instances where the
assimilation exists in pronunciation, but is not represented in
writing, are plentiful: cupboard, pronounced cub-board (or
cubberd); blackguard, pronounced blagguard, etc. In all these we
must, on the one hand, admit with respect to the recognition of the
group as compound, that, even if it has not promoted assimilation, it
has at least checked the tendency to restore the theoretically correct
pronunciation of the final consonant of the former member in each group.
On the other hand, however, it is as certain that the very facility thus
afforded to the working of the assimilating tendency has aided the
phonetic isolation of the group and promoted the fusion.
The most effective cause of phonetic isolation, however, lies of course
in the influence of accent. This has been sufficiently illustrated in
the course of the foregoing discussions.
In all these discussions we have mainly regarded the transition of a
syntactical group into a compound. Several of our examples, however,
well illustrate the fact that, just as the fusion between the two
members of some group may be insufficient to stamp the combination as a
compound, so, also, such a compound loses its character as such for the
consciousness of all but the student of language, when the fusion
proceeds too far. The compound then becomes, to all intents and
purposes, a simple word; it serves no more as model for analogical
compounds with the same members, and at the very most gives the
impression of having been ‘derived’ from its first member by a suffix.
To instance this, we need only recall a few of our examples to the
reader’s mind--bandog, auger, furlong, etc., or (with the
suffixes) bishopric, kingdom, etc.
A careful study of these and similar examples will show that in the
first-class of compounds, no longer recognised as such, sometimes both
members have become obsolete, and in both classes almost always one.
We have now reached a point whence we can observe the conditions
necessary to give birth to a suffix, or, if the phrase be preferred,
necessary to degrade an independent word into a suffix.
We have seen a suffix originate in a noun which either (as in a case of
‘-ric’) became obsolete as an independent word, or whose connection
with the etymologically identical independent form ceased to be felt in
the linguistic consciousness of the community.
But such a fate may and does often befall a word without converting it
into an acknowledged suffix. It has befallen the noun ðyrl (‘a hole’),
in nostril ( nose-thirl), or the word búr (‘a dweller’) in
neighbour (‘a near-dweller’), and yet neither -tril nor -bour have
become recognised as suffixes in the English language.
What more, then, is required?
First of all, the first element must be etymologically perfectly clear;
cf. kingdom, bishopric as against nos-tril, gos-sip.
Secondly, the second element must not occur in one or two combinations
only, but in a sufficiently large group of words, in all of which it
modifies the meaning of the first member in the same way; cf.
nos-tril, gos-sip, as against ‘kingdom,’ ‘widowhood.’
This second condition can scarcely be fulfilled except in cases where--
Thirdly, the second element has originally, or in its combination with
the others, some such abstract and general meaning as state,
condition, quality, action, etc.
A few words on one of the best-known suffixes in English will make this
clear. Though the phrase would hardly stand in written or literary
language, we might indicate a dealer in pianos as the piano-man,
i.e. ‘the man who has pianos.’ In the oldest stages of language, not
only could a single noun be thus used with an almost adjectival force,
but even a compound (or what was then still a syntactical co-ordination)
of two or more nouns, or of adjective and noun, could be thus employed.
Thus, e.g., in Sanscrit, a much-rice-king, would mean ‘a king who
possesses much rice,’ i.e. ‘is rich;’ and the group man-shape (or
its equivalent) might have been used for man-shape-having. Such
compounds abound in Sanscrit, and could be formed at will. They were
called Bahuvrîhi compounds. Now, without of course wishing to assert
that the very combination man-ly is an original one, it is to such a
combination of a noun with the noun which afterwards became lic in
Anglo-Saxon that we owe the suffix ly. The phonetic differentiation
and the development of meaning from shape-having to appearance or
quality-having, isolated the member from its corresponding independent
form (which in German and Dutch still exists as Leiche and Lyk 
body or corpse), and gave us lic (later ly) as a suffix.
From all that we have said it must be clear that this process has gone
on neither in prehistoric nor in historic times only, but is one which
is repeated again and again, and consequently--seeing that prehistoric
times are of unknown, but certainly enormous length--we must be on our
guard against assuming that all these prototypes of Indo-Germanic
suffixes must necessarily have existed at one time as independent words
in the language, before the process which transformed them into suffixes
began to operate. We may, nay, we are almost compelled to assume that
there, too, they arose in succession, and that then as now, whenever
phonetic decay or other causes had affected a suffix to such an extent
as to take away the appearance of a derivative from what was once a
compound, the suffix was no longer felt as such; it ceased to serve for
new combinations, and another more weighty suffix took its function and
supplanted it in all but a few remaining cases.
The most superficial knowledge of any modern language, or of Latin
etymology, is sufficient to show that it is as impossible to draw a line
between suffix and flectional termination, as between syntactical group
and compound. Even a Frenchman, unless he has had the true historical
explanation pointed out to him, feels in a future tense like
j’aimerai, a verb-stem aim, and a termination -erai indicative of
futurity, though, nowadays, there are but few students of French grammar
who ignore the fact that aimerai is a compound of the infinitive
aimer and the first person singular, present, indicative, ai  (I)
have. Similarly, we may safely assume that few Romans felt in a
pluperfect amaveram a perfect stem amav and eram the imperfect of
sum, much less in amabo a present stem ama and a suffix derived
from the same root as their perfect fu-i. It is certainly useless to
illustrate this further.
We may now conclude with three observations, the truth of which will be
apparent from what has gone before.
First. Even when an inflected form, by means of comparative study of all
its oldest forms and equivalents in cognate languages, has been brought
back to its prototype, and analysed into what are commonly considered to
be its component parts, we must remember that these parts cannot have
been fused into the integer which we now find made up of them, and yet
have retained their original form and original meaning. Just as
kingdoms has certainly not arisen from king + dom + s, a Greek
optative pherois is not a compound of pher + o + i + s,
though, undoubtedly, each of these elements have their regular
representatives in other words of the same function, and most probably
had their prototypes in fuller forms, in a more independent state. We
have no means of knowing what these forms were, or what their original
function was when still independent.
Second. Many words which we now consider as “simple” may have been
compound or derivative. Our inability to further analyse does not prove
primitive unity.
Third. In the history of Indo-European flection we do wrong if we assume
the separate existence of a period of construction and one of decay.
The division commonly adopted of the parts of speech in the
Indo-European language is convenient as a classification; but it must be
borne in mind that it is not logically accurate, nor is it exhaustive.
It is indeed impossible to divide words into sharply defined categories,
seeing that, however we may divide them, we shall find it difficult to
exclude some from each category which may fairly claim to be registered
under some other category or categories, basing their claim upon at
least certain uses.
The accepted grammatical categories have had their form determined
mainly by the consideration of three points: (1) by the meaning of each
word taken by itself; (2) by its function in the sentence; (3) by its
capacity for inflection, and the part it plays in word-formation.
As regards the meaning of the word, we may notice that the grammatical
categories of substantive, adjective, and verb correspond to the logical
categories of substance, quality, and activity, or, more properly,
occurrence. But here, at the outset, we find that the substantive is
not confined to the denotation of substance, as there are also
substantives denoting quality and occurrence as, ‘brightness,’ a ‘rise.’
There are also verbs which denote continuous states and qualities; as,
‘to remain,’ or the Latin ‘cande’  ‘to be white.’ Pronouns and
numerals again have a right on the score of meaning to be separated as
classes from substantives and adjectives: but these, again, must be
separated from each other in their substantival as against adjectival
use (e.g. each as against each man; Six went and six stayed as
against Six men, etc.; this and that as against this book and that
one), which forbids us to simply co-ordinate the classes: substantive,
adjective, pronoun, numerals. And, on the other hand, it must follow
that, if pronouns and numerals are to be regarded as distinct species of
the noun class, the same separation must be extended to the adverb
class: since badly, there, twice, are related to each other just
as bad, this, two.
To come to the connecting words. The lines that define the class of the
conjunctions are quite arbitrary; where, for instance, is called an
adverb even in passages like this:[201] “Where, in former times, the
only remedy for misgovernment real or supposed was a change of dynasty,
the evil is now corrected at no greater cost than a ministerial crisis.”
As and while, again, are called conjunctions. In the simple
sentence, the test usually applied to distinguish prepositions from
conjunctions is case-government. But it certainly is entirely illogical
to call words like before, since, after prepositions when they
occur in simple sentences, and to call them conjunctions when they
connect sentences;--for this function is in both cases exactly the same;
cf. before my interview with you, and before I saw you.
If we wished to classify words according to their function in the
sentence, it might seem obvious to divide words (1) into those which can
of themselves form a sentence, (2) into those which can serve as
members of a sentence, and (3) those which can only serve to connect
such members.
In the first division we might, then, place the interjections, which,
when isolated, are really imperfect sentences. But these also occur as
members of a sentence, sometimes with and sometimes without a
preposition; as, Woe to the land! Out on thee! Oh my!
The finite verb in its original use better fulfils the idea of a perfect
sentence. But in its present use it appears--if we except the
imperative--as a mere predicate attached to a subject separately
denoted. And the so-called auxiliaries are mainly used as mere
connecting words.
Connecting words, again, such as conjunctions and prepositions, are, as
we have seen, derived from independent words by a displacement as to the
appreciation of the part which a word plays in a sentence (cf. Chap.
XVI., pp. 282 and 284.). Such words are during, in regard to,
notwithstanding. And there is this further reason why they cannot be
sharply distinguished from other kinds of words--that a word may be an
independent member of the particular sentence to which it belongs, and
yet at the same time serve to connect this with another sentence. If I
say, for instance, The man who believes this is a fool, the who is
at once an independent member of the relative sentence and a connecting
word between the principal and subordinate sentence. This is universally
the case as regards the relative pronoun and relative adverb. It is true
also of the demonstrative when this refers to the preceding or following
sentence; as, I saw a man, he told me, etc. But even if this first
classification as to function could be consistently carried out, any
further attempt at subdivision leads us into fresh difficulties,
considering that the substantive, as opposed to the adjective and verb,
is the part of speech which serves as subject and object. We might,
indeed, be tempted to utilize this fact as the principle of our
subclassification. But we find in the first place that a substantive can
also be used attributively and predicatively, like an adjective (cf. We
are men, We are manly), and, on the other hand, other words may serve
as the subject in such sentences as Well begun is half ended; Slow
and steady wins the race; Finished is finished. An adjective, too,
may serve as object; as, He takes good for bad; Write it down, black
on white; to make bad worse.
We have indeed seen that the use of prepositions to introduce
subordinate sentences is very common in English; as, After he had
begotten Seth, etc.
The division which can be most systematically carried out is that which
divides words according as they are inflected or not, and according to
their mode of flection. In this way three convenient divisions may be
made of nouns, verbs, and uninflected words. But even here the nominal
forms of the verb, such as the infinitive, to love (amare, lieben)
and indeclinable substantives such as the Latin cornu and the English
adjectives, resist the carrying out of the division. Pronouns, again,
are differently inflected from nouns, and they differ among themselves.
In other languages, the system of inflection of the substantive is
sometimes identical and sometimes not. It might be alleged that the
formation of degrees of comparison was a decisive mark of the adjective:
but even here we are met by the fact that some languages, like Sanscrit,
can compare nouns and even persons of the verb;[202] and others, like
Latin, can compare the substantive (cf. Plautus’ use of
oculissimus--Curc. I. ii. 28, etc.) amicissimus  ‘(my) best
friend,’ etc. This usage is seen in the English word ‘top-most,’ which
is the substantive top with a double superlative ending (see Mätzner,
vol. i., p. 270); the termination most superseded the O.E. m- est,
which answered to the A.S. (e) mest, derived from a positive (e)
ma, which itself had a superlative signification (cf. optumus).
Again, the very meaning of some adjectives renders them incapable of
comparison; as, wooden, golden, etc.
It is, then, clear that the current division of the parts of speech, in
which all these three principles of classification are more or less
embodied, leads to so many cross divisions that it cannot be
consistently carried out. The parts of speech cannot be sharply and
neatly partitioned off into eight or nine categories. There are many
necessary transitions from one class into another; these result from the
general laws of change of meaning, and from analogical formations which
are characteristic of language in general. If we follow out these
transitions, we at the same time detect the reasons which originally
suggested the division of the parts of speech.
To consider, first, the division between substantive and adjective. The
formal division is based in the Indo-European languages on the capacity
of the adjective of inflections of gender and comparison. In individual
languages still further distinctions have arisen. Thus, for instance,
the adjective in the Teutonic and Slavonic languages admits of a
double, nay we may even say a triple, mode of inflection: cf. gut,
guter, der gute; in which declensions forms occur absolutely without
analogy in the substantives. In Modern High German, we have to note the
existence of the two declensions (the weak and the strong). On their
uses and that of the third or undeclined form of the adjective in the
predicate, the most elementary German grammar will give the student all
information. As for the forms of adjectival (and pronominal) declension
which are distinct from the noun declension, it is necessary to go back
to Anglo-Saxon, or, better still, to Gothic. It is, of course, not
necessary to master these languages thoroughly in order to simply
compare their systems of inflection. Seeing that in English the
adjectives have no flection, the test is no longer applicable to the
language in its present form; though the test of capacity for comparison
applies here still. But in spite of all differentiations of form, the
adjective may receive, at first ‘occasionally’ then ‘usually,’ the
function of a substantive: cf. The rich and the poor, old and young,
my gallants.[203] From this substantival adjective a pure substantive
may be derived by traditional use, especially if its form becomes in any
way isolated as against other forms of the adjective; as, sir  Fr.
sieur, from seniorem as against senior. The instinct of language
shows that it apprehends the adjective definitely as a substantive when
it connects it with an attributive adjective; as, the powdered pert
(Cowper, Task); a respected noble, etc.: or with a genitive; as, the
blue of the sky. In English the possessive pronoun is connected with
many words, such as like, better, etc.,[204] which, if felt as
adjectives, would demand other constructions. Cf. He was your better,
sir (Sheridan Knowles, Hunchback, III. ii.); To consult his superiors
(Cooper, Spy, ch. i.): He is my senior.
There are many adjectives in all languages which are completely
transformed, such as sir (cf. supra); priest (a shortened form of
what in French appears as prêtre, older form prestre (cf. Dutch
priester), all from Greek presbuteros, ‘older,’ the comparative of
presbus, ‘old’); fiend, M.E. fend, A.S. féond, ‘an enemy,’
originally the present participle of the verb féon, ‘to hate;’
friend, M.E. frend, A.S. freónd, originally present participle of
fréon, ‘to love;’ etc.
The transformation of a substantive into an adjective is less familiar,
and perhaps more interesting. In the process, we disregard some parts of
the meaning of the substantive, excluding from that meaning first and
foremost the meaning of substance, so that only the qualities attaching
to the substance remain in view. This transformation virtually occurs as
an occasional use whenever a substantive is employed as predicate or
attribute: a king’s cloak (for a royal cloak); He is an ass, etc.
A substantive in apposition approaches the nature of an adjective,
especially when it is used to denote a class; and, again, more
especially when the combination is abnormal and metaphorical: cf. a
virgin fortress; a maiden over; boy-competitors; turkey-cock,
hen-sparrow; a house-maid;[205] music-vows (Hamlet, III. i.)
Sometimes an adverb which can strictly speaking be connected with an
adjective only, is joined to the substantive, and serves to mark its
adjectival nature. Thus we often hear such expressions as He is ass
enough, idiot enough; More fool you, etc.
In other cases, again, such as twenty thousand troops were taken
prisoner, the word prisoner shows by its absence of inflection that
it is apprehended as an adjective.
It might be thought practicable to draw another distinction that would
hold good as between substantive and adjective. The adjective, it might
be alleged, denotes a simple quality, the substantive connotes a group
of qualities. In such a word as blue, we have the one broad idea of
one colour fairly defined and commonly understood within certain
definite limits. In the meaning of, e.g., rose, we embrace all the
qualities which go to make up our conception of flower in general, and
the special flower which we call rose in particular. And no doubt
the definition may be considered in the main correct. But the
distinction cannot be consistently maintained throughout. For instance,
there are many adjectives which cannot be said to indicate really one
quality only. Such are most adjectives in like or ly (warlike,
manly, etc.); and, on the other hand, substantives are again and again
used so as to denote one quality and only one. The transition from the
denotation of a simple quality to that of a group of qualities is
effected by the use in a special sense of a substantival adjective;
as, ‘the blacks,’ for ‘the negroes’  ‘a radical,’ ‘a conservative.’
When once such usage has been started, there is no necessity for the
train of thought, which led the first employer to specialise the word,
to be present in the consciousness of other speakers. Directly the word
has come to be so specialised, and the train of thought which led to its
specialisation has been forgotten, the word stands isolated as an
independent substantive.
The converse process is not uncommon; in which, out of a group of
qualities, a single one is dwelt on and the rest are left out of
consideration: such are, for instance, the names of colours; as,
lilac, rose, mulberry, etc., used adjectivally. From this use the
adjectives with specialised meanings, derived from substantives, we may
gather that adjectives, i.e. terms for simple qualities, arose out of
terms for groups of qualities, i.e. substantives. The process must
have been from the very beginning that the speaker singled out one
notion from a group and dwelt on it, passing over the others bound up in
the group. In fact, the speaker must, at a very early stage, have used
words in a figurative sense. In such expressions as That man is a
bear, That woman is a vixen (as, indeed, when we say bearish or
vixenish), we are ascribing to him or her only some one particular
characteristic of the whole number of characteristics of the thing which
the substantive indicates when used in its usual sense. The distinction
between noun and verb might seem, at first sight, to be well marked both
by the diversity of forms which characterise these separate parts of
speech, and by the diversity of functions which they severally fulfil.
But in English, we are at once met by the fact that we have numerous
verbs which are identical in form with nouns, and in many cases are
actually nouns employed as verbs; as, to lord it, to walk, to dog,
to run: while we constantly see the process going on before our eyes,
of the transference of a noun into the category of verbs; as, to chair
a man, to table a motion. How near they may approach in function may
be seen from sentences like I looked at the show, and I had a look
at the show. No doubt it maybe said that verbs have certain formal
characteristics, which distinguish the verb from the noun, such as
personal terminations, distinctions between voices, and forms to denote
mood and tense. But, in the first place, these forms have, to a great
extent, disappeared in English, with its other inflections; and, in the
second place, even in the most highly inflected languages we find verbs
defective in some of these characteristics, and thereby approaching in
form to nouns: cf. the Italian bisogna andare ( ‘I need to go’) as
against Che bisogna andare (‘What need to go?’). While, again in
nouns, forms occur defective in case and gender-signs; as, cornu,
‘horn;’ genu, ‘knee;’ etc. Further, in the Slavonic languages, we
actually find the verb in the past tense agreeing in gender with its
subject; as, Tui jelala, ‘Thou (feminine) didst wish,’ etc. Lastly,
the differentiation of the construction of the two parts of speech is
anything but sharply marked, as we may see in cases where a substantive
actually takes the case which would naturally be taken by the verb with
which it is connected: Seeing her is to love her; Hearing him recite
that poem is enough to draw tears from the eyes.
Even in highly inflected languages, like Latin and Greek, the personal
endings, commonly regarded as the special formal characteristic of the
verb, have no place in the participles and infinitives.
Again, such an expression as Rex es, ‘Thou art king,’ is identical in
meaning with Regnas, ‘Thou rulest;’ so that the verbal termination, as
such, need not serve to mark any distinction of meaning between the verb
and the adjective or substantive used predicatively.
If we say that it is of the essence of the verb to describe a mere
transient process limited by time, while the adjective or substantive
denotes a permanent quality, we must observe that the adjective may
describe a transient quality; as, dirty, pale: while verbs may be
used to describe states; as, to glow, cf. candere  to be white.
The participle must be regarded as partaking of the nature of the verb
as well as of that of the adjective. The peculiarity of the participle,
as compared with the adjective, is that it enables us to express an
occurrence or event attributively; as, They, looking, saw. We must
look upon adjectives as the older formation of the two, and indeed we
must suppose that adjectives had been completely developed before
participles could take their rise at all.
The characteristic difference between the participle and the so-called
verbal adjective is that the participle, unlike the adjective, is
capable of denoting tense; as, τύψας ( ‘having struck’). The
participle, when standing as an attribute to a noun, partakes of the
construction of a noun (i.e. substantive or adjective); as, Vir
captus est (‘The man is caught’). But it may depart from the character
of a noun by departing from such nominal construction, and striking out
a new path of its own.
Thus, in He has taken her, He has slept, we have a use of the
participle quite unlike the use of the adjective. No doubt it is true
that such a phrase as He has taken her signified originally He has or
holds her as one taken; cf. Cura intentos habebat Romanos, (Liv.,
xxvi. 1), but we do not now apprehend the construction thus. In French,
the transition from the general adjectival into the special participial
construction is clearer: J’ai vu les dames, ‘I have seen the ladies;’
but Je les ai vues, ‘I have seen (fem. plur.) them,’ and les dames
que j’ai vues, ‘the ladies that I have seen (fem. plur).’ In Italian,
we say Ho vedute (fem. plur.) le donne  ‘I have seen the ladies,’
as well as Ho veduto le donne (masc. or genderless sing.). In Spanish,
all inflection in the case of periphrases formed with ‘haber’ is
abolished; it is as correct to write la carta que he escrito  ‘the
letter which I have written,’ as to say He escrito una carta  ‘I have
written a letter.’ On the other hand, in periphrases made with tener
(to hold, used as auxiliary like to have), a later introduction into
the language, the inflection is always retained; in tengo escrita una
carta,  ‘I have written (fem.) a letter (fem.)’ it is as imperative to
observe the concord of gender as in Las cartas que tengo escritas 
‘The letters which I have written.’
Conversely: it is possible for the participle to gradually recur to a
purely nominal character. Bearing in mind our definition of the
participle, we may say that this recurrence has taken place as soon as
the present participle is used for the lasting activity; as when we
talk about a knowing man: and as soon as the perfect participle comes
to be used to express the result of the activity; as, a lost chance.
The more such participle is employed in a specialised meaning--as, for
instance, metaphorically,--the more speedily and thoroughly will the
transformation become accomplished; as in such cases as striking,
charming, elevated, drunken, agèd, learnèd, crabbèd,
doggèd, etc. Nay, such words may even combine with another, after the
laws of verbal construction: as in the case of high-flying,
well-wishing, flesh-eating, new-born, well-educated.
The participle, again, like other adjectives, may become a substantive,
e.g. the anointed; and the substantival participle, like the
adjectival, may either denote a momentary activity (or, rather, an
activity limited as to time), e.g. the patient, i.e. the
suffering one, or a state, e.g. the regent  the ruling one 
the ruler. It may, indeed, entirely lose its verbal nature, as,
friend, fiend, i.e. the loving one, the hating one, etc.
The nomen agentis, resembling in this respect the participle, may denote
either a momentary or a lasting activity; as, the doer  ‘he who
does;’ the dancer (if  ‘he who is wont to dance,’ e.g., as his
profession). In the former application it remains closely connected with
the verb; and there is no reason, except custom, why it should not, like
the participle, take an object, just like the verb; in fact, that it
should not be correct to say the teacher the boy for ‘he who teaches
the boy,’ just as it is possible to say the school-teacher. We
actually do find in Latin, dator divitias, ‘giver riches (acc. plur.)’
 ‘he who gives riches;’ justa orator (Plautus, Amphyt., 34), ‘the
just things (acc. neut. plur.) orator or speaker’  ‘he who speaks just
things.’
In Shakespeare, we find and all is semblative a woman’s part (Twelfth
Night, I. iv.), where an adjective, semblative, is similarly construed
with a verbal force; the sentence being equivalent to ‘and all resembles
that which we might expect in a woman.’ On the other hand, the nomen
agentis, when denoting lasting activity, may separate more and more from
the verb, and thus finally lose its special character, as noun
indicating a ‘doer,’ e.g., owner, actor, father (lit. ‘he who
feeds or who protects;’ from a root which means either to nourish or
to protect).
The transition from verb to noun is again seen in nomina actionis, like
transportation, liberation. These may also approximate to the verbal
construction; as, My transportation from England to Ireland (‘I was
transported from England to Ireland’); pearl fishery (‘the fishing for
pearls’). Here, again, the notion of a lasting activity inherent in the
substantive tends to make the original idea of a nomen actionis grow
faint; and the connotation of a lasting condition sets in. And, again,
the more that metaphorical and other unusual or special usages attach to
the word, the more does such word become isolated as against its
original use, cf. position, transportation, conviction,
goings-on. It may, indeed, become so far isolated as to lose all
connection with the verb, as in reckoning, in the sense of an account;
cf. addition, in French, in the same meaning (cf. the French
expression for ‘Waiter! the bill, please,’ Garçon! l’addition s’il vous
plaît!)
The infinitive is really a case of the noun of action, and must
originally have been constructed in accordance with the usage in force
at the time for the syntactical combination of the corresponding verb
with other nouns. But, in order that it may be felt as a true
infinitive, its mode of construction must no longer be felt as it
originally must have been felt; it must, in fact, have become isolated
in its employment, and such isolation became then the basis of further
development. But the infinitive having thus developed, reverts in many
cases to the character of a noun: its want of inflection, however,
always has a tendency to prevent this; and, accordingly, the most common
cases in which it appears as a substantive are as subject or object. In
sentences like ‘not to have been dipped in Lethe’s Lake Could save the
son of Thetis from to die’ (Spenser, Faëry Queen); ‘Have is have’
(Shakespeare, King John, I. i.); ‘I list not prophecy’ (Winter’s Tale,
IV. i. 26); ‘I learn to ride,’ etc., it seems certain that the
infinitive is constructed after the analogy of a noun; but in such
constructions as I let him speak, I hear him walk, it is hardly
apprehended as so constructed by the instinct of language of the present
day.
Languages which possess declined articles possess exceptional facilities
for thus approximating the infinitive to a noun, as the Greek τὸ φιλεῖν,
τοῦ φιλεῖν, etc. ( ‘the “to love”--of the to-love,’ etc.): cf. such
instances as the English Have is have (Shakespeare, King John, I. i.);
Mother, what does ‘marry’ mean? (Longfellow); Him booteth not resist
(Spenser, Faëry Queen, I. iii. 20.) And similarly the German das
lieben (‘the “to-love”’); French mon pouvoir (‘my “to-be-able”’). In
Latin, the same approximation is rendered possible by the demonstrative
pronouns; as, totum hoc philosophari (Cicero), ‘all this
“to-philosophise;”’ Inhibere illud tuum (ibid.), (‘that “to-prohibit”
of yours’). Modern High German and the Romance languages have gone so
far as to employ the infinitive as the equivalent to a noun pure and
simple, even in respect of inflection; as, Meines sterbens ( ‘of my
“to-die”’); Mein hier-bleiben ( ‘my “here-remain,”’ i.e., ‘my
remaining here’). In the Romance languages, the process is rendered
easier by the abolition of case-difference; cf. mon savoir-faire (
‘my “to know--to-do”’  ‘my cleverness of management’). Old French and
Provençal actually invest the infinitive with the s of the nominative
case--Li plorers ne t’i vaut rien: ‘The “to-weep” not to thee there
avails anything’  ‘It avails thee nothing to weep’ (cf. Mätzner, iii.,
pp. 1-2).
It is possible for the verbal construction to be maintained in many
cases, even in spite of the use of the article. For instance, ὸ σκοπεῖν
τῖ πράγματα (lit.  ‘the “to-see” the matters.’).
The oldest adverbs seem to be mainly in their origin crystallised cases
of nouns (adjectival or substantival), in some cases of which they are
the result of the combination of a preposition with its case. Thus, in
English, we have the genitive suffix appearing in else (formerly
elles, the genitive of a root el or al, meaning ‘other’), once
( ‘ones’), twice needs. Much and little were datives, miclum
and lytlum; cf. whilom ( hwílum.)
Thus, in Latin, many adverbs are derived from the accusative--as,
primum, ‘first;’ multum, ‘much;’ foras, ‘abroad;’ alias, ‘at
another time;’ facile, ‘easily;’ recens, ‘freshly:’ from the
locative--as, partim, ‘partly;’ or the ablative, as falso,
‘falsely;’ recta, ‘by the right way;’ sponte, ‘voluntarily.’ The
following are instances of the combination of a preposition with its
regime: amid ( on-middum), withal, together, anon; French,
amont, aval ( prep. a (‘at’) mont, ‘mountain,’ and val,
‘dale’  upwards, and downwards).
This formation of adverbs leads us to suspect that the original method
of forming them will also probably have been from nouns; and that as
some of them may have proceeded from nouns before the development of
inflections, in such cases merely the stem form, pure and simple, was
employed to express adverbs. Thus such expressions as to speak true,
to entreat evil, will represent the oldest types of adverbs.
The adverb stands in close relationship to the adjective. It bears a
relation to the verb and to the adjective as well, analogous to that
borne by an attributive adjective to a substantive; thus He stepped
lightly is analogous to His steps were light; and That is absolutely
true to The truth of that is absolute. This analogy manifests itself,
among other instances, in this--that an adverb may, generally speaking,
be formed from any adjective at will.
The adjective differs formally from the adverb in this, that the
adjective, commonly speaking, admits of inflection, and hence of
agreement with the substantive. In English, where this test is absent,
it is difficult for the instinct of language to draw a sharp line
between the two, as in to speak loud, to speak low. It is difficult,
in English, to maintain that there is any real difference between the
use of good in good-natured and the same word in he is good; or
the use of well in he is well dressed, and in he is well.
Again, many adverbs in different languages resemble adjectives in this,
that, when joined to another adverb, they take an adjectival inflection.
Thus, in French, it is correct to say ‘toute pure,’ ‘toutes pures’ 
‘entire, (fem. sing.) pure,’ ‘entire (fem. plur.) pure (fem. plur.);’
both  ‘entirely pure,’ ‘quite pure:’ in Italian, tutta livida  ‘all
(fem. sing.) livid’  ‘quite livid:’ in Spanish, todos desnudos  ‘all
(masc. plur.) nude’  ‘quite naked.’
There are many cases in which an attributive adjective is employed
convertibly with an adverb; cf. Hispania postrema perdomita est 
‘Spain LAST (fem. sing.) was conquered,’ for ‘AT LAST’ (Livy, xxviii.
12); Il arrive toujours le dernier, ‘He always comes last;’ Il est
mort content  ‘He died happy.’ Compare also these two usages--De ces
deux sœurs la cadette est celle qui est le plus aimée, ‘Of these two
sisters the younger is the one who is the (neut.) more loved (fem.
sing.);’ or la plus aimée, ‘the (fem.) more loved (fem.)’ (Acad.)[206]
Adjectives used in connection with nouns signifying the agent or the
action are used in a way hardly to be distinguished from an adverbial
use; as, a good story, a good story-teller, an old bookseller. In
English, owing to its lack of inflections, an ambiguity may arise in
such cases as the last cited; we might apply the word old to the man
who sells the books, as well as to the books themselves. The common
custom in English is to shun ambiguity by the use of the hyphen; as, an
old-book seller. But English attempts likewise to remove the ambiguity
by maintaining the adverb for one case, after the analogy of the
construction with the verb--as, an early riser, a timely arrival,
etc.--though this distinction is not consistently carried out.
The resemblance of adjectives and adverbs produces uncertainty in the
meaning to be attached to certain adjectives; the adjective, when
attached to a noun, may be conceived of as referring either to the
person, or as referring to one of his qualities; thus, a bad coachman
may either mean ‘a wicked coachman,’ or ‘a coachman looked upon as bad
in the quality of his driving.’ In the latter case, the adjective is
used in the special sense acquired by the adverb; as, he drives badly.
It is natural, then, as the adjective and the adverb so generally exist
in pairs, that we should feel the need of possessing both parts of
speech for all cases. There are, however, many adverbs which are derived
from no adjective, and which thus have no adjective parallel to them. In
this case we are compelled to employ the adverb with the function of the
adjective, as in ‘He is there,’ ‘He is up,’ ‘The door is to,’
‘Heaven is above;’ in which cases the instinct of language apprehends
the construction as identical with that found in such phrases as He is
active, The door is open, etc. Again, in such sentences as the
mountain yonder, the enemy there, the drive hither, the adverb
marks its difference from the adjective by its position in the sentence.
But this rule is not consistently observed; there are cases in English
where the adverb is inserted between the article and its substantive;
as, on the hither-side, the above discourse, the then monarch, and
more extensively in the vulgar that there mountain, this here book,
where the adjectival adverbs are pleonastic.
Just as, e.g., in Latin, we find the adverb used in sic sum (‘so I
am’), Ego hunc esse aliter credidi,[207] ‘I him to be otherwise
believed’  ‘I thought he was a different kind of man;’ so we find in
English While this scene was passing in the cabin of the man, one quite
otherwise (i.e. different) was passing in the halls of the master
(Mrs. Beecher Stowe, Uncle Tom’s Cabin, i. 43), in which, and other
similar constructions, the adverb again has all the functions of an
adjective.
Prepositions and conjunctions as link-words or connecting elements took
their origin from independent words through a displacement of the
distribution. Prepositions were once adverbs, serving to denote more
closely the direction of the verbal action; as, ‘to go in,’ ‘to carry
off,’ ‘to throw up,’ ‘to fall down.’ They then became displaced,
i.e. detached from the verb, and came to belong to the noun,
furthering the disappearance of its case-endings and assuming their
office.
To stamp a word as ‘connecting word,’ this displacement must have become
customary and general. For, in their occasional usage, the most various
parts of speech may serve as connecting words. The functions of the
adverb, as such, have been sufficiently illustrated. It is thus only
where such adverbs are with a certain regularity, or preferably, used as
link-words, that they begin to be felt as prepositions or conjunctions.
But even then, notwithstanding such syntactical development, the word
can still be used independently in its former function, and it remains
impossible to definitely range it in any particular class. This only
becomes rational and feasible when the word has become obsolete in its
original usage.
We may accordingly define a preposition as a link-word which may be
followed by any substantive in some of its case-forms where this
combination is no longer syntactically parallel to that between noun or
verb and the word in its original independent sense. Accepting this
definition, we shall not explain considering, in such a sentence as
considering everything he has done very well, as a preposition,
because its construction is that of the verb to consider. When we come
to instead of it is different. Stead, A.S. stede, meant ‘a place;’
and in the stead of the man would have been a perfectly natural
construction, the genitive case showing the independence of the noun:
but whether the genitive is still felt as a genitive depends on the
question whether we think of instead as a compound of the preposition
in with the noun stead. As soon as we cease to feel it as such, we
do not think of the genitive as regularly depending on the preceding
substantive, and the preposition is created. No doubt the instance which
we have given proves that the instinct of language is vacillating; we
still find in his stead looked upon as somewhat archaic indeed, but
still current English. In some cases the isolation has become looser,
and in others it has become absolute. The word nigh (A.S. neáh, M.E.
neigh, as in ‘neighbour’) was originally an adverb, and identical in
meaning with the word near (A.S. néar, the comparative degree of
néah). But we do not think of nigh and near as connected. The word
till is still more peculiar. It is, properly speaking, a case of A.S.
tíli, a noun (cf. Germ. Ziel, Gothic tils) meaning ‘aim’ or
‘goal,’ whence the idea of towards developed. Off and of are not
thought of as connected, and yet they are the same word. In this case
the relationship becomes obscured, owing to divergency in the
development of signification. In other cases the isolation of the word
is due to the disappearance of the old method of construction in which
it was used. Thus since, M.E. sithens, is from síððen  A.S.
síððan, which is itself a construction for síððan, put for síððam,
‘after that.’ Here the ðam is the dative case masculine of the
demonstrative pronoun used as a relative; it answers exactly to the
N.H.G. seit dem; cf. ni ðanaseiðs (Ulphilas, Mark ii. 14) + ‘no
more.’ In the same way, the word ere is a comparative form derived
from A.S. ǽr, ‘soon.’
The origin and rise of the conjunctions may, like that of the
prepositions, be followed historically. Many of them arise from adverbs
or pronouns in their function as connective words, as we have discussed
in the foregoing paragraphs. These words, then, are already
connecting-words ere they become established as conjunctions pure and
simple. All depends thus upon the linguistic consciousness of the
speaker, whether he will consider them as still pronoun or adverb, or as
real conjunction, and this consciousness, again, is largely dependent
upon the degree to which the word in question has been etymologically
obscured.
We have seen how the demonstrative that has become a conjunction, and
can easily realise how to some extent in many others, such as because,
in case, etc., though no demonstrative word proper has entered into
their composition, the relation of the noun which forms their second
part to what follows is of a demonstrative kind.
Prepositions and conjunctions are more clearly distinguishable in such
languages, as, e.g., German, where the flection of noun and adjective,
or the absence of flection, shows whether the word is used as the one or
the other. In English, this test has disappeared. But even in highly
inflected tongues this test is not applicable in cases where a
preposition is used before an indeclinable word or combination of words.
And that such difference could not arise before the flection had arisen,
is self-evident.
We have now to consider the question of the relation of writing to
language; how far it has influenced it, and continues to influence it;
and for what reasons it seems an inadequate representation of language.
The first thing necessary for us to remember is that, though writing is
the only means whereby the speech of the past has been preserved for us,
yet it is equally true that, before we can consider writing at all, we
have to convert it into spoken language, and to affix sounds to the
symbols of language which have descended to us from the past. All such
translation of symbols affixed to language in the past must necessarily
be imperfect; we can only arrive approximately, for instance, at a
satisfactory conjecture of the actual sounds of the English language as
spoken by Shakespeare; and the data for determining such questions must
always be more or less incomplete.
The written representation of language must, however, always be an
interesting object of study to the philologist--partly because it has
been the vehicle of the sounds of language, and partly because it is an
important factor in the development of language itself.
Writing appeals, in the first place, to a much larger community than
speaking. A single page of written matter may appeal to thousands more
easily than the most eloquent sermon or address. Nay, writing may in
this way appeal to the whole of a linguistic community, causing those of
the present time to exert their influence on generations yet unborn.
Writing which consistently and regularly represents the spoken language
must be more effective in perpetuating that language than writing which
does not so represent it. Theoretically, we assume that written
languages fall into one or other of these classes, and we classify them
as languages spelt phonetically and spelt non-phonetically, or, as some
prefer to express it, historically.
But we must remember that no alphabet, however perfect, can assume to be
a correct picture of language. Language consists of a continuous series
of sounds, never broken, but consecutive. Just as no amount of drops of
water separately considered could give the picture of a river, so no
amount of symbols, however minute, could give the real picture of a
sentence. A sentence, nay, a single word, is a continuous whole; the
symbols whereby we represent it can represent only the chief parts, and
represent them as disconnected. The transitions, the links remain
unindicated, and so do such important factors as quantity, accent, and
tone.
Further, the alphabets in use are, even the best of them, imperfect. It
is plain that, when the members of a particular linguistic community,
like, e.g., the Germans or the Portuguese, seek to make their alphabet
a consistent picture of the sounds of speech, they aim merely at
representing the sounds of their own language. A scientific alphabet
should aim at representing all possible sounds, and not merely those
needed in an alphabet of a particular linguistic community.
Even in the case of the best-spelt languages, i.e. the languages in
which the principle of one sound standing for one sign, and one sign for
one single sound obtains, we shall find that these aim only at
satisfying the ordinary practical needs of the language. They make as
few distinctions as is consistent with ordinary clearness and
consistency. For instance, they deem it unnecessary to denote the
difference of sounds arising from the position of a letter in a
syllable, a word, or an accent, provided only that a similarity of
position produces habitually similar results. A certain degree of
consistency is thus attained without a superfluity of symbols. In Modern
High German, for instance, the hard s sound in lust, brust, etc.,
has the same symbol to represent it as that which elsewhere represents
the soft s sound: but no ambiguity arises from this, because s, when
followed by t, unless the group st is initial, is always hard; thus
the s in reist is pronounced as in lust. Similarly, final s is
habitually pronounced hard or unvoiced; as, hass, glas, eis.
In the same way, in English, it would have been superfluous, in an
alphabet merely directed to satisfy practical needs, to adopt a special
sign for the front nasal n in sing; because n, followed by and
combined with g, always has the same sound. Similarly, n, in such
combinations as the Fr. vigne, Ital. ogni, has a consistent and
regular pronunciation, and therefore there is no need for any special
representation of it.
There are indeed languages, like Sanscrit, in which the principle of
phonetic spelling is more or less carefully carried out. Generally,
however, we find that the same sign of any particular alphabet has to
serve for more than one sound, and it almost invariably happens that we
augment the confusion by employing different signs for one and the same
sound. The chief reason for these defects is because most nations,
instead of creating symbols to represent the sounds in their own
language, have been content to adopt an alphabet ready to hand, made to
suit the requirements of the language of another nation. Thus the
alphabet used by most civilised nations was that which the Phenicians
elaborated from the Egyptian hieroglyphics; and the Russians adopted
with modifications the Greek adaptation of this. Another reason for the
inconsistency is that, as pronunciation changes, it is obvious that the
denotation of symbols ought to change as well. These same causes may
also produce an unnecessary superfluity of symbols. In English, for
instance, the alphabet suffers alike from superfluity and defect.
Several signs serve to denote the same sound, as c, k, ch; c,
s; oo, ou; ou, ow; a, ai; e, i, ee, ea, ie,
ei; i, y; cks, x; oa, aw; and many others might be cited.
Again, there are many cases in which the same symbols denote different
sounds, such as th in thin and then; a in hat and fatal; i
in pin and pine.[208]
It is not the place here to point out in detail the advantages of a
well-spelt language over a less well-spelt one.[209] Practically,
however, the consideration cannot be disregarded that, if English
orthography represented English pronunciation as closely as Italian does
Italian, at least half the time and expense of teaching to read and to
spell would be saved. This is assumed by Dr. Gladstone[210] to be
twelve hundred hours in a lifetime, and as more than half a million of
money per annum for England and Wales alone. A few instances, taken
mainly from Pitman’s work, may serve to show how all-pervading the
irregularity is.
The same symbol serves to denote different vowel sounds (1) even in
words etymologically connected; as, sane, sanity; nation,
national; navy, navigate; metre, metrical; final, finish;
floral, florid; student, study; punitive, punish: (2) in
words etymologically unconnected, as in fare, have, save; were,
mere; give, dive; notice, entice; active, arrive;
doctrine, divine; gone, bone; dove, move, rove, hover.
Again, cf., change, flange; paste, caste; bind, wind;
most, cost; rather, bather; there, here; fasting,
wasting.
By collecting examples in this way, Mr. Pitman has arrived at the
conclusion that, in English, we endeavour to express fourteen distinct
sounds by using five signs in twenty-three different ways, without any
real means of discriminating when one sound and when another is
intended, or what sign should be used to denote a particular sound. But
besides these separate vowel signs, digraphs and trigraphs to the number
of twenty-two are used to express the same fourteen sounds which the
five vowel signs have already attempted to represent; though they, in
addition, attempt to represent two more diphthongal sounds, making
sixteen distinct sounds in all. For instance, pail, said, plaid;
pay, says; heat, sweat, great, heart; receive, vein,
height; key, prey, eye; sour, pour, would; town,
sown.[211]
Of the consonants, we may remark, in the first place, that many are
silent, as in debt, limb, indict, condemn: in some cases, silent
consonants have been interpolated to suggest a mistaken derivation, as
in sovereign, foreign, island; in others, again, they have been
capriciously retained to mark the derivation of a word (as in
receipt), and yet omitted in the case of other words derived from the
same source. Then, for instances of the inconsistent use of consonants,
we may take the following table from Pitman; (a few examples have been
added):--
  ch.--church, chaise, ache; yacht, drachm.
  ck.--pick (k or c superfluous).
  gh.--ghost, cough, hough; dough, night, inveigh.
  ng.--singer, linger, infringer.
  ph.--physic, nephew; phthisical.
  rh.--rhetoric, myrrh, catarrh.
  sc.--science, conscience, discern, score.
  sch.--schism, schedule, scheme.
  th.--thistle, this, thyme.
  wh.--whet, whole.
If, in addition to these obvious defects in alphabets, we bear in mind
the fact that the accentuation commonly remains for the most part
undenoted, we must admit that our alphabets present us with a very
imperfect picture of spoken language. For an attempt to realise a
scientifically correct alphabet, we must refer to Sweet’s ‘Handbook of
Phonetics,’ and Melville Bell’s ‘Visible Speech,’ ‘Sounds and their
Relations,’ A. J. Ellis, etc., not to mention the works in other
languages, such as those by Techmer, Vietor, Trautmann, Sievers, etc.
We have to bear in mind that writing is to living language nothing more
than what a rough sketch is to a finished picture. The sketch is,
commonly speaking, sufficient to enable one familiar with the figures
which are meant to be represented, to recognise them. But should several
painters attempt to reproduce a finished sketch from such rough
outline, they would produce a set of pictures differing very much in
details. For instance, each painter, if he did not recognise certain
objects in the sketch, would be tempted to substitute in their place
others with which he might be familiar. Just so, those who seek to
reproduce the sounds of a language from written symbols, will be tempted
to substitute similar sounds with which they are familiar for the sounds
of the sketch, as, for our purpose, we may call the alphabet. Even in
the case of a foreign language possessing an alphabet in some respects
identical with our own, like the French, it is considered necessary to
prefix to the alphabet a description of the sound intended to be
conveyed by the symbol; and even this cannot obviate the necessity of
hearing the sound, especially when the alphabet is not based upon
scientific principles. It is equally true that the same remarks are
applicable to the case of a dialect belonging to the same group of
languages as our own.
In any linguistic area where the same language is spoken, there exist
different dialects, i.e. variations from the standard language
possessing a quantity of divergencies from the sounds of the standard
language. The common alphabet has to stand as the representative of all
these dialects alike, and the same symbol has to present, for instance,
the u sound as uttered by a west countryman and as uttered by a
Scotchman. R, again, is pronounced by a Londoner quite differently
from the way in which it is pronounced by a Scotchman. F is pronounced
like v in Devonshire and Cornwall; and the h is in many words
notoriously written but not pronounced in the greater part of England
proper. Besides such obvious differences, which might be multiplied
indefinitely,[212] we have to remember that the quantity, the pitch,
and the accent remain undenoted by the standard alphabet in the
different dialects; and we shall easily see that a large quantity of
dialectic differences is taken no account of in writing. The obvious
result of this want of adequate representation of the sounds of the
separate dialects must be that the speakers in the separate dialects
must each consider that the sound with which he is himself familiar is
the one intended to be represented by the symbol which he sees.
The result of our present system of representing sounds is that we are
unable to give an idea of other dialects than our own, except in cases
where the discrepancy between these and our own is very strongly marked.
Even in such cases merely a rough indication of the pronunciation can be
given; but the delicate and manifold differences occurring between the
speech of individuals of different communities and different generations
must pass unmarked. It is needless to add that the present system of
representation of sounds is useless as a register of the actual state of
pronunciation, and of the changes which are gradually occurring. How
interesting would it be to Englishmen had a scientific alphabet been
employed to record the different stages of pronunciation of their
language, so that the nineteenth century might know with approximate
exactitude how Chaucer, Shakespeare, and Milton spoke!
But in any changes which we may see fit to make in orthography, we must
beware of supposing that, in a perfect alphabet, we should possess an
absolutely controlling influence over pronunciation and sound changes.
No doubt if sounds were accurately registered by a scientific alphabet,
the more educated classes of the community who were familiar with this
alphabet and its denotation would be led to attempt to maintain their
pronunciation in accordance with the standard afforded them by this.
But, even assuming that such an alphabet were generally adopted, it is
plain that it could only represent one particular dialect of any
linguistic area, which dialect would, as a rule, be that of the
best-educated classes in the community. Then, as now, dialects would
remain unrepresented, or, at the best, would be registered for
scientific purposes or for a limited use. Then, as now, absolutely
different sounds occurring in different dialects would be denoted by the
same letters. Then, as now, different sound images would be associated
with different letters, which are, of course, merely connected with
sounds by an association of ideas. Then, as now, the written language
would be unable to record the changes that had passed upon the language
of an entire community, confining itself to those that had passed over
the normal or standard dialect, which, as we have seen, would be in
England the dialect of the educated classes. But it must be held that
language is not consciously altered to suit orthography; any such
alteration would be contrary to the common development of language. The
orthography may, however, be altered to suit the language; but, as it is
obvious that the language must change more quickly than the orthography,
it follows that the orthography must remain, at the best, an imperfect
record of written sounds.
The defects of written speech which have been already indicated are not
as great as those which set in when the orthography of a language has
been long settled. The original spellers tried to commit the sounds of
each word to writing; they broke up the word into its elements, and
compounded the letters corresponding to these elements to the best of
their ability. But there is no doubt that practice in reading and
writing makes this process continually shorter. The consciousness that
the symbol is bound up with the sound grows gradually fainter. A group
of symbols represents a group of sounds; and the sounds are apprehended
in groups, and not singly. The sentence, and not the word, becomes the
basis of reading. Indeed, fluent reading and writing would be impossible
if this were not the case. Poets, like Burns, who write in their own
dialect, however much they may try to reproduce accurately the sounds of
that dialect, and however well they may succeed, still are fain to
content themselves with a certain conventional approximation to accurate
representation; in fact they are very much influenced by the
conventional orthography of the literary language. They are also
constrained to attempt to produce an approximate amount of accuracy with
the smallest amount of labour; and their labour is considerably lessened
by their acceptance of conventional symbols. Our forefathers really
tried to indicate consistently their pronunciation of their words. They
tried to spell phonetically, and the result may be seen in the different
spellings of the manuscripts of Langland, Chaucer, Shakespeare, etc.
The advantages of a fixed orthography are mainly that the reader
connects a definite orthographic image with a definite signification. We
can understand this if we take two words which are pronounced
identically but differently spelt, such as bough, and the verb to
bow. Were these words written identically, the written picture common
to the two would associate itself with the sound common to the two
words, whereas, at present, each meaning has its own distinct symbol.
Each divergence in spelling, though from a phonetic point of view it
may be an improvement, increases the difficulty of understanding what is
written. Divergencies or want of fixity in spelling may arise from the
awkwardness of writers, who may have employed several signs to denote
the same sound, or a single sign for more than one; or, again, it may
arise from the want of some controlling body, like an academy, whose
business it is to regulate orthography. On the other hand, it may be due
to the very perfection and consistency of the characteristics of the
language which has to be reproduced. If, for instance, as in Sanscrit,
or in Welsh, the spelling of the same word varies with its pronunciation
according to its position in the sentence, a single meaning must be
expressed by different symbols, and it is impossible for one definite
written picture to connect itself with the first form. The more fixed
the orthography, the more is the process in reading and writing
facilitated.
On the whole, it is true that the natural tendency of the orthography is
towards greater fixity, though it is also true that retrogressive
movements sometimes occur, as when marked phonetic changes set in. There
are three principal methods whereby it is commonly sought to produce a
fixed and uniform orthography: (1) by the abolition of variations
between several different methods of spelling; (2) by regarding
etymology and taking it as a guide to orthography; and (3) by holding to
traditional spelling and disregarding sound. The first of these methods
is, generally speaking, in accordance with the aims of phonetic
reformers; the two latter are in direct contravention of their aims. But
against these efforts to produce fixity in orthography there remains
always the counter tendency to bring language and its written
expression into harmony; and this tendency exhibits itself partly in the
effort to correct original deficiencies in spelling, and partly in a
reaction against the discrepancies constantly produced in written
language by sound-change. As these two tendencies are constantly
operative, the history of orthography is a description of the temporary
triumph of one or other of these two forces.
If we should institute a comparison between the development of writing
and that of language, we shall find certain points of resemblance, and
others of marked divergence. With reference to the latter; in the first
place, changes in orthography are brought about more consciously, and
with more purpose on the part of the writer, than changes of language on
the part of the speaker. In the second place, whereas in language a
whole linguistic community is exposed to a change, in the case of
writing, only that portion of the community who write or print or
publish are directly interested. And thus it is that the authority of
single individuals is able to carry weight to a much larger extent than
in language. Again, orthographical changes do not depend upon personal
contact, but appeal to the eye, and therefore are capable of affecting a
wider, if a less numerous, public than linguistic changes. A good
instance of the effect of changed orthography is seen in the Welsh
language as contrasted with the Gaelic. The Welsh has changed its old
cumbrous orthography for a simpler and more phonetic system; and, in
consequence, the Welsh language has become more easy to acquire, and,
generally speaking, a handier instrument of literary intercourse. No
reformer has arisen for Gaelic, which consequently is little read and
little written in comparison with its Cymric sister.
One of the most obvious difficulties that meets the orthographical
reformer at the outset is the presence in the alphabet of one or more
signs to represent the same sound, a case which has been already
referred to in this chapter. This superfluity of sound-signs may be an
inheritance from the language whence the alphabet in use is borrowed;
thus, in our alphabet, we have received c and k and q, all
denoting the same sound. Or, again, it may happen that, in the language
from which the alphabet was borrowed, two signs had a different value,
but that the language which borrows them is unable to employ these signs
to make such a distinction, which, indeed, does not exist in it. Thus,
the Greek alphabet employed χ to represent the aspirated
guttural; but, as we do not employ that sound at all, the symbol ch,
as seen in cholera, is superfluous. Again, both symbols of the
borrowed language easily pass into use in the language which borrows
them, if the sound which the borrowing language means to represent lies
between the two sounds represented by the symbols borrowed. Thus, for
instance, in the Upper German dialect, at the time of the introduction
of the Latin alphabet, there was no distinction answering to that
between the Latin g and k, b and p, f and v, consequently,
one of these symbols was, for that particular German dialect,
superfluous.
In English there is one cause of vacillation which should be noticed as
of interest, viz., the attempt of certain writers to omit certain
letters which seem to them superfluous, as when honor, color, etc.
are written instead of honour, colour, etc. As far as this spelling
expresses supposed philological accuracy, it is, of course, erroneous.
Superfluities in spelling are disposed of in much the same way as
superfluities in words and forms. The simplest way is by the disuse of
one of the two signs. The other way is by differentiating the signs
which were originally used indifferently. This differentiation may serve
to supply a want in the language; as when, in Modern German, i, u,
and j, v were gradually parted into vowel and consonant. Thirdly, it
happens that one manner of spelling becomes usual in one word, and a
different manner in another, the differences depending upon mere
caprice. Thus we spell precede, but proceed; proceeding, but
procedure; stream (from A.S. stréam) with ea, but steep (A.S.
stéap) with ee. A.S. bréad is now written bread, but A.S. réad
has become red; A.S. nu we write now, but ðu is at present
thou; etc. Some of these and similar inconsistencies owe at least
their preservation, if not their origin, to the desire of
differentiating in the spelling such words as have the same sound but
different meanings; e.g., to and too, steel and steal, red and
read, etc.
Etymology, or, more correctly, etymological grouping, and analogy have
great influence upon spelling, as well as on the spoken language. Again
and again an older phonetical spelling has been replaced by a real or
fanciful etymological one. Thus, for instance, it is owing to the
influence of etymological grouping when certain alternations of sound,
due to flection or other change of position, are left without indication
by any corresponding changes of spelling. Thus, in Anglo-Saxon, the word
dæg had its plural dagas. Final g was dropped, and the vowel
before it changed into the sound now represented by ay in day. A g
between two vowels, however, generally became w, and, accordingly,
dagas became dawes, a form frequently found in Middle English. In
this case, analogy interfered, and a new ‘regular’ plural, formed
directly from the singular day, replaced the older historically
correct form. It is, however, possible to imagine that this had not
happened in the spoken language, and that, whilst people SAID day,
dawes, they had WRITTEN day, dayes. Or rather, if the declined
cases in the singular had remained in use--in which cases, also, the g
stood between two vowels--that the w written in the declined cases of
the singular, and in all cases of the plural, had begun in time to be
written also in the nominative singular, where the y was the
‘regular’ form. This supposititious case is only an instance of what has
happened in many languages, e.g., in German. German ‘unvoices’ all
final consonants; i.e., a d or t, when final, is pronounced t, a
p or b is pronounced p, etc. Before terminations of inflection,
however, d and b remained ‘voiced,’ and we find accordingly in
Middle High German such pairs as nom. tac, gen. tages. The g of
the declined cases has, however, supplanted the c of the nominative
singular, and the word is now written throughout with g, though no one
pronounces the same sound in the nominative singular, as in, say,
tages, or nom. plur. tage, etc.
Again, etymological considerations first caused and now preserve the
insertion of b in debt, g in reign. That, in many cases, these
etymological considerations arose from sheer ignorance does not alter
the fact that it was their influence which, after causing the insertion
of, e.g., the g in sovereign, the h in rhythm, the l in
could, the w in whole, the p in receipt, saved these
absurdities from desirable extinction.
It must, however, be admitted that, owing to these very irregularities
and inconsistencies of spelling, as far as it is to be regarded as
representing the spoken language, we owe sometimes a greater uniformity
and regularity in the grammar of the written language than could
obtain if spelling followed pronunciation more closely than it does.
Thus, for instance, in most weak verbs the past tense is expressed in
writing by the addition of ed, though sometimes, in the spoken word,
nothing but the sound of d (I roll, I rolled), or even t (I
express, I expressed), is added. The ed, in these cases, may be
considered to be preserved partly from habit, partly from a feeling, to
some extent etymological, that such and such a meaning (or change of
meaning) is indicated by such and such a spelling or letter-group.
There are two senses in which we may speak of mixture in language--the
broader sense in which every speaker must influence those who hear him,
and be influenced by them in turn, and the narrower sense in which one
language or one dialect is influenced by another with which it is but
distantly connected.
In order to understand the process of such mixture as this, we ought to
observe, in the first place, what passes in the case of individuals. The
circumstances leading to such mixture may be best observed in the case
of persons who speak more than one language. Bi-lingualism on a large
scale, of course, is best seen where a community resides upon the
confines of two linguistic areas, as on the borders of England and
Wales. It may, again, be due to the sojourn of a person in a foreign
country: it becomes more marked still when persons pass from one country
and settle in another; and still more when large masses of people are
permanently transferred under foreign domination by conquests and by
colonisation, as in the case of the inhabitants of British India or the
French population of Lower Canada.
The knowledge of a foreign tongue may also be imparted by writing, as
when we learn classical Latin and Greek; but in this case, the
influence exerted by the foreign tongue is felt only by the better
educated classes of society.
In all cases where nations have been brought into contact, and have been
mixed on a large scale, bilingualism is common. It is natural to expect
that, of the two languages employed, that of the more prominent nation
will gain a preponderance over the other, whether its prominence be due
to its power, or industrial or intellectual capacity. There will be a
change, in fact, from bilingualism to unilingualism; and the process
will leave traces more or less marked on the superior language.
An instance of this process on a large scale was afforded by the Roman
Conquest of Gaul, the consequence of which was a struggle between the
tongue of the Latin conquerors and that of the Celtic conquered race.
The result was that the Latin ousted the Celtic, but not without leaving
traces of the Celtic idiom in certain words, in the pronunciation, and
the construction of the language.
But it will be found that the mixture will not easily affect single
individuals, so as to transform their diction into a language made up of
elements equally, or nearly equally, taken from either of the two
conflicting languages. Even assuming that a person is perfectly master
of both languages, and that he may pass from one to another with perfect
ease, he will yet adhere to one language for the expression of a clause
or a sentence. Each tongue may, however, exercise a modifying influence
upon the other in the way of affecting its idioms, its accent, its
intonations, etc. It may happen that the influence of one tongue may be
predominant in particular areas of language, as we see that the English
is in Lower Canada in matters of commerce. This leads to such
expressions as jobbeur, cheurtine (shirting), sligne (sling),
charger le jury, forger, cuisiner les comptes, etc.: see American
Journal of Philology, vol. x., 2.[213] Of course, where one of two or
more languages has been learnt as the mother tongue, this will always
have more influence over foreign languages, however perfectly acquired,
than the latter will have over the mother tongue; but we must not
under-rate the influence which a foreign language may have upon the
mother tongue, especially when it is looked upon as fashionable, or as
the key to an important literature. The influence of the foreign tongue
may obviously spread to persons who are wholly unacquainted with it, by
the contact of these with persons who have adopted or assimilated the
foreign elements.
The two principal ways in which a foreign idiom may influence the mother
tongue are these. In the first place, foreign words may be adopted into
the mother tongue and retained, commonly speaking, in a more or less
altered form. The English language has borrowed words of this kind from
numerous languages. Thus, from Dutch, we get the word sloop (sloep,
itself a loan-word from Fr. shaloupe; whence we, again, have borrowed
shallop), yacht: yam, from some African language, through the
Portuguese: from Spanish---flotilla, cigar (Sp. cigarro),
mosquito: from Italian--domino, casino, opera, stucco: from
Persian--chess (Persian sháh, a king, through O.Fr. eschac),
orange, shawl, rice, sugar. India gives us sepoy; Germany,
meerschaum; Russia, a steppe; China, tea; etc.[214]
In the second place, the method of connecting and arranging the
sentences, and the idioms used by the mother tongue may be taken from
the foreign language, and this, even though the material of the language
be maintained intact.
The chief cause for the adoption of foreign words into the mother tongue
is, of course, the need felt for them in the mother tongue. Words are
constantly adopted for ideas which have as yet no words to express them.
The names of places and persons are the most common among such adopted
words, to which may, of course, be added the names of foreign products,
such as tea, sago, chocolate. The names of such products may be
taken from the language of communities in a very low state of
civilisation. On the other hand, when a language finds it necessary to
introduce technical, scientific, religious, or political terms, it is
fair to suppose that the language which lends the words must be that of
a nation in a higher state of culture than the language of the nation
which borrows them. There are many words relating to social subjects
imported into English from French which may serve to give a good idea of
the weak point of the nation which borrows, and of the strong point of
the nation which supplies them. Such are numerous works having reference
to ease in conversation, such as bon-mot, esprit, ‘wit;’ verve,
‘liveliness; ‘élan,’ spring;’ etc.; and it will be correspondingly
found that the language whence such supplies are drawn is very rich in
the qualities for which it possesses such abundance of names.
But languages may be tempted to borrow beyond their actual needs when
the foreign language and culture is higher prized than the native, and
when, accordingly, the usage of such words is considered fashionable or
tasteful. Instances in point are the numerous Greek words introduced
into classical Latin, such as techinæ (Plautus, Most., II. i. 23),
and the numerous French words borrowed by German and English, such as
étiquette, chaperon, à outrance.
If a speaker has an imperfect mastery of a foreign tongue, he will be
apt to employ, when endeavouring to speak it, numerous loan-words from
his mother tongue. He will, in fact, insert into the foreign tongue any
number of words which may serve the purpose of expressing the idea which
he feels necessary. Such loan-words, of course, take time before they
become usual. They cannot become usual unless they are often repeated,
and, as a rule, unless they proceed spontaneously from several
individuals as the expression of a general need. Even then they may only
become current in particular circles: as when, for instance, such
technical terms as those applicable to music are borrowed. Such words,
when fairly accepted by the language, are treated like other words in
the language, and are regarded by the speakers of it as native, and
inflected as such. Foreign words, when borrowed, are commonly treated
thus. There are no two languages in which the two stocks of sounds are
precisely identical. Consequently, the speaker will, as a rule, replace
the foreign sounds by those which he conceives most nearly to represent
them in his own language; and, in cases where the foreign language
possesses sounds not known in his own, he will fail to pronounce these
correctly, at least till after much practice. It is well known how very
seldom any one masters a foreign tongue so as to speak it without some
incorrect accent. Thus it happens that in the cases where a conquering
language spreads over a nation speaking a different language, the
original language of the conquered people must leave some traces in the
production of sounds, and changes will occur in other ways as in
accentuation, etc. Numerous instances might be cited of where such
invasion of a conquering tongue has occurred on a large scale, as in the
case of the Moorish invasion of Spain, the Latin invasion of Gaul, the
Norman-French invasion of Saxon England.
In cases where one people merely comes into contact with another in the
course of travel or of literary intercourse, the number of those who
acquire the language of the foreign people will be necessarily small.
The word will, therefore, from the outset, be pronounced imperfectly;
the persons who first introduced the word or those who immediately
accepted it will insert sounds with which they are familiar among the
foreign ones. It thus happens that when a foreign word has once made its
way into a language, it commonly exchanges its proper sounds for those
native to the language which borrows it. Even those who know the foreign
language most perfectly, and are aware of the proper pronunciation of
the loan-word, have to conform to the pronunciation of the majority, at
the risk of passing for affected or pedantic. For instance, in English,
in spite of all the numerous loan-words which occur in the written
language, very few new sounds have been introduced, such as the nasal
m in employé; and even these sounds are dispensed with among the
uneducated, and imperfectly reproduced by many of the better educated.
One common result of the adoption of a foreign word into another
language is that popular etymology begins to operate, causing the word
to appear less strange to those who have borrowed it, as in the familiar
instance rose des quatre saisons, ‘rose of the four seasons,’
transformed by English gardeners into quarter sessions rose.[215]
The changes which naturally affect foreign words upon their reception
into the language, must of course be kept distinct from those which
affect them after they have become an integral part of the language,
when they change according to the laws of sound-change of the language
into which they are adopted. In fact, it is often possible to tell the
epoch at which a word has passed from one language into another, by
noting whether it has or has not participated in certain laws of
sound-change. Thus, where in Old High German the Latin t is
represented sometimes by t, and sometimes by z (as tempal 
templum), ‘temple’ as against ziagil ( tegula  ‘till’), the form
with z represents an older stage of borrowing than the form in t;
and, again, words in which the Old High German represents the Latin p
by ph or f, must be held to represent an older stage of borrowing
than those in which it is found as p or b: cf. pfeffer, ‘pepper;’
Pfingsten, ‘Pentecoste,’ as against pîna, (Lat. ‘pæna’): priester
(Gk. ‘presbuteros’).
Similarly, such a word as chamber, or chant, must plainly have been
borrowed before the period of sound-change when the sound of ch
regularly took the place of the Latin c; and this we know to have been
the history of the c sound in the dialect of the Ile de France, whence
those and other similar forms come to us.
But foreign words are exposed, after their adoption, to the same
assimilating forces as when they are first adopted: and one of the
transforming forces which should be mentioned is the transference of the
native system of accentuation to foreign words. In English, a study of
Chaucer or Langland will show us how French words originally adopted and
pronounced according to the French method of accentuation, by degrees,
and not till after a period of vacillation, passed over to the system
common in Teutonic languages: thus Chaucer has lánguage and langáge;
fórtune and fortúne; báttaile and battáile; láboure and
labóur: thus Pope accentuates gallánt. Of course, words may be so
far phonetically modified as to become unrecognisable even by persons
who know the language whence they are borrowed. Who, for instance, would
recognise in the word pastans[216] the French passé-temps, our
pastime; or in the common Scotch word ashet, the French assiette.
Thus, in the same author, Gavin Douglas, we find veilys (calves),
representing the old French word, véel (vitellus). The strangeness may
be increased still more by changes which have occurred in the language
from which the word is borrowed. Thus our word veal represents an
older form of the French language than veau; and the German
pronunciation of many French words is that of an older period of French
pronunciation; as París, concért, offizíer. German words adopted
by Romance languages have been even more violently transformed: who, in
the French words tape, taper, would recognise the German zapfen;
in the Italian toppo, the German zopf; in the French touaille, the
South German zwehle; in the Italian drudo, the German traut? In
the same way, the signification of the word in the parent speech may
change; as in the case of the French emphase, ‘bombast,’ as against
emphasis; biche (‘hind’), etc. Finally, it may disappear in the
parent language and survive as a loan-word in the language which has
borrowed it; as, for instance, the French word guerre, ‘war,’ in which
survives the Old High German werra, ‘quarrel,’ the same word as our
war.
The word may be borrowed several times at different periods. It appears
in different forms, of which the more recent bears the stamp of the
parent language, while the older has been exposed to phonetic changes
which have more or less violently acted upon its form. It will generally
be found that the meaning attaching to the word when it is borrowed a
second time will differ from that which it bears on the first occasion.
These words which are more than once borrowed are commonly called
doublets; they are very numerous both in French and English, and have
been treated of at length by Bréal and Skeat. Instances of such are
priest, presbyter; champagne, campaign; preach, predict;
prove, probe. Proper names constantly afford instances of repeated
forms of borrowing processes; cf. Evans, Jones, Johns;
Thomasson, Thomson; Zachary, Zachariah. It sometimes happens
that a loan-word long since naturalised in a language receives a partial
assimilation to its form in the language whence it originally came; a
good instance of this is seen in such forms as honor, color, etc.,
which, especially in America, are often so written, instead of honour,
colour, etc. Sometimes words are adopted into a language from two
kindred languages; the signification will then be similar, and the sound
will differ but little--the sense, as well as the form, contributing to
keep the two words together. German has several of such loan-words
borrowed from the French and Latin; as, ideal and ideell; real and
reell; which at a former period had an actually identical meaning, but
now are differentiated. In English, spiritual and spirituel differ
like spiritus and esprit. Some words, again, are borrowed from a
language in which they already occur as loan-words. Thus the French have
borrowed from English the word square, O.Fr. esquarré. Thus, again,
Greek words come to us through the medium of the Latin: whence it is
usual to write such forms as Æschylus, Hercules, instead of
Aischulos, Heracles. Thus, again, Latin words borrowed from Greek
have come into English through the medium of French--cf. such words as
music, protestant, religion, etc.; and also such proper names as
Horace, Virgil, Ovid, and Livy. Persons conversant with the
original naturally refer such words to the language through which they
came; and thus, in adopting Greek words, they employ the Latin accent
and the regular English termination which represents that French
termination whence the English one came. Such words are alopecy,
academy, etc.
Derivatives formed with unusual suffixes often receive in addition the
regular normal suffix. This is specially the case when a native
synonymous suffix is added to the foreign one: as in Waldensian,
Roumanian, sometimes the native suffix is substituted for the original
suffix of the foreign language; as, Sultana, for Sultaneh. Words are
borrowed in their entirety; but not suffixes, whether derivative or
inflectional. When, however, a large number of words is borrowed
containing the same suffix, these range themselves into a group, and
fresh formations are formed upon the analogy of these. Thus, in English,
after the analogy of such words as abbey, rectory, etc., we have
such words formed as bakery, tannery, brewery: and, again, we find
Romance words like French mouchard, ‘a spy,’ Italian falsardo,
‘impostor,’ with the Teutonic suffix: and very many English words with a
French suffix; as, oddity, eatable, drinkable, murderous: and,
again, poisonous, as against vénéneux in French. In English, again,
we find such suffixes as -ist in jurist forming fresh additions to
their group by analogy, mostly, however, in educated circles; as,
Elohist and Jahvist, though such words spread eventually to the
whole nation, as in the case of protectionist. -Ism is another of
these, as in somnambulism; and -ian, as in Hartingtonian.
Inflectional terminations are also thus adopted, but more rarely, and
only between nations that have been in close contact. In German it is
common to use Christi as the genitive of Christus, and often the
French plural in s is applied to German words, as in Frauleins. In
English, we speak of phenomena, etc., and we employ indices in a
mathematical sense. The English genitive ending has found its way into
Indo-Portuguese, as in Hombres casa, ‘the man’s house.’ The gypsy
dialects have adopted the inflectional terminations of each country
where they are spoken.
Words are sometimes affected in their meaning by other languages; and
further, the idioms peculiar to one language are affected by those
current in another. This influence is called the influence upon
linguistic form. The most common instance of the effect of one
language upon another in this case, is where, when two words partially
coincide in meaning, they are assumed to exactly tally in the whole
extent of their meaning. This is, of course, one of the most common
faults in translation. Thus an English child, learning French, will
often be heard to use expressions like ‘Cela n’est pas le chemin,’ for
‘That is not the way;’ a German will say ‘brought a leading
article,’ for wrote; a Frenchman, ‘Can you conduct?’ for ‘Can you
drive?’ Sir Charles Dilke, in his Problems of Greater Britain,[217]
gives an interesting account of the French Language as spoken by the
French settlers in lower Canada. It appears that the more educated of
these speak a somewhat archaic and very pure French, but that the
peasant or shopkeeper will say Je n’ai pas de change, for ‘I have no
change.’ He will describe dry goods on his sign-board as marchandises
sèches, and will call out when busy ‘J’ai un job à ramplir.’ In
public meetings we hear of ‘les minutes,’ and the seconder of a
resolution is called officially ‘le secondeur.’ The ‘speaker’ is
l’orateur, and ‘Hear! Hear!’ is rendered by Ecoutez.
Sometimes a word is coined in one language after the model of one
existing in another language, to supply a want felt by the language
which borrows. This is especially the case with technical terms, as when
accusative, ablative, etc., are introduced into English from the Latin
model; and such words as these are liable to be misunderstood, as they
may only tally with one portion of the meaning of the original word, or,
indeed, in some cases be a mistranslation, as where, genetivus, ‘the
begetting case,’ was taken as the Latin equivalent of γενικός, ‘the
general case,’ and accusativus, ‘the accusing case,’ of αἰτιατική,
‘the conditional case.’ Another instance is the word solidarity, which
we have coined to express the French solidarité.
Again: entire groups of words, or idioms, are literally translated from
one language into another. Thus we hear, in the mouths of Irishmen, such
expressions as I am after going, this being the literal translation of
the Irish idiom for the rendering of the future tense. Thus the
Austrians say Es steht nicht dafür, for ‘it is not worth the trouble,’
because the Bohemians express this phrase by nestojé za to. The
following idioms are current in Alsace;[218] it will be seen that they
are literal French renderings of German phrases. Est-ce que cela vous
goûte? ‘Does that please your taste?’ Il a frappé dix heures, ‘It has
struck ten;’ Il brûle chez M. Meyer, ‘There is a fire at M. Meyer’s;’
Ce qui est léger, vous l’apprendrez facilement, ‘That which is easy,
you will learn it easily;’ Cher ami, ne prends pas pour mauvais, ‘Dear
friend, do not take it amiss;’ Pas si beaucoup, ‘Not so much;’
Attendez; j’apporterai une citadine, ‘Wait; I will bring a citadin
(drink).’ On the other hand, the South-West Germans employ phrases after
the French model; as, Es macht gut wetter, ‘It is fine weather.’
Finally; the syntax of one language may exercise an influence over that
of another language. An instance of this has been already given. The
form of the French language, which is a Romance language grafted on to a
Celtic stock, has been much influenced by Celtic syntax (cf. the mode of
expressing numerals, soixante-dix  60 + 10, parallel to Celtic 3
scores + 10; quatre-vingts  4 × 20  Celtic 4 scores, etc.).
Again: as the Slavonic languages can employ one form for all genders and
numbers of the relative, we find in Slavo-German the word was (what)
correspondingly employed; cf. ein mann, was hat geheissen Jacob: der
knecht, was ich mit ihm gefahren bin.
Of course authors may consciously imitate a foreign idiom with the view
of producing a particular effect, as when Milton wrote ‘and knew not
eating death;’ ‘Fairest of all her daughters Eve.’
In the case of dialects, almost the same remarks hold good as in the
case of different languages. Word-borrowing is the most common process.
Such words are most readily borrowed as are needed by the borrowing
dialect for its own purposes; such as the Scotch words dour, douce,
feckless, etc. Sounds, on the other hand, are not easily influenced by
kindred dialects. The nearest native sounds are commonly substituted for
those of the alien dialect. Of course the case may occur where two
dialects have, in the course of their development, so far parted that
words etymologically connected have lost all connection in sound. In
this case, the sound of the alien dialect will as a rule be maintained.
An instance of this is the Scotch unco’ in the phrase unco’ guid,
which is really the same as uncouth; but the accent has shifted, and
this tends to disguise the origin of the word.
In all modern civilised countries, we find, side by side with numerous
dialects, a standard language, professing to stand aloof from all
dialects, and to represent what may be called the classical form of the
language. This standard language is in fact an abstraction, an ideal, a
supreme court of language prescribing rules to be followed in the case
of each language. It bears the same kind of relationship to the actual
processes active in language, as a particular code of laws to the
aggregate of all the cases in any district in which that code is
applied; or of a definite dogmatic text-book to the religious practices
and faiths of all the individuals of a community confessing the
particular faith embodied in that book.
Such a standard language as we have described,--as it does not result
from the various processes natural to the life of language,--necessarily
differs from language in general by its fixity; wherever a change takes
place in a standard language, the element of consciousness is more
clearly present than in the ordinary changes of language. Not that a
standard is absolutely all-foreseeing in its provisions, or can claim to
decide on the entirety of the cases for which it gives the example. A
code of law, in the same way, or a confession of faith, may be liable
to several interpretations, and may not cover some of the cases which
come under its purview. Besides this, we must always take into account
the possible lack of intelligence on the part of those who ought to act
up to its provisions; and, again, the feeling which must set in from
time to time, that many of the provisions of the code are obsolete,
owing to fresh moral or economical views which may have become current
since it was drawn up. When such a feeling has set in strongly, the code
is commonly altered to suit the demands of the day. Just so the standard
language may, and indeed must, alter from time to time; but its
alterations are, like those of the code, adopted designedly, or at all
events with much more consciousness than those which set into the
ordinary course of language.
This standard language is, speaking generally, the language of a certain
restricted circle in an entire community--most commonly, as in England,
the language of the best-educated classes. The standard language may be
settled in two different ways: (1) by spoken language; (2) by written
authorities. Supposing that a standard language is to result from a
spoken language, it is necessary that the persons who are regarded as
authorities should be in continuous and full communication with each
other, in order to keep the standard as consistent as possible.
Sometimes we find a particular town or district cited as speaking the
language which is quoted as the standard. Thus it is common to quote
Hanover, in Germany, and Tours in France, as places where the purest
German and French are heard. But it is clear that, even assuming the
correctness of such model towns or districts, none but the
better-educated classes even of those districts can be looked upon as
likely to maintain the standard language in its purity. In England, the
standard language can be defined in no other way than as the language of
the well-educated classes, who make it their object to speak alike, and
to exclude abnormal or dialectic variations from the standard language.
In France, besides the appeal to the usage of the educated, there is the
further tribunal of the Academy, whose verdict is final upon all
questions of literary taste and diction. In Germany, the language which
must be taken as the standard language is not that of any town or
district, but the purely artificial language employed on the German
stage in serious drama. This language forms a very interesting and
remarkable example of a standard language which is consciously
maintained as the most effective medium of communication for a nation
which is more divided into dialects than most other European nations.
The stage language of Germany is maintained by a continuous and careful
training, based on a knowledge of the science of phonetics. The objects
aimed at by the actors have been twofold: in the first place, it was
necessary to practise an eclecticism in the choice of their language,
which should succeed in making it intelligible to the largest number of
German speakers: in the next place, beauty and grace could not be left
out of consideration. Hence a fixed norm had to be settled on and
maintained, as it is plain that a consistent pronunciation maintained
unchanged is a main factor in promoting intelligibility. Again,
inconsistency in pronunciation is practically the admission of
dialectical peculiarities: and such peculiarities at once suggest
characterisation where none would be in place. Those points, then, in
the varying dialects, were alone selected for this normal language which
seemed more conducive to clearness. Sounds and intonations peculiar to
any dialect were admitted into the standard language if they
contributed to this result. Syllables which had come, in the course of
time, to be slurred over on account of their light stress were
reinstated in the integrity of their original sounds. The orthography
was made to aid in the reconstruction of the pronunciation. Such studied
straining after clearness must necessarily prevent the stage language
from passing into a colloquial language. Its very clearness would savour
of a stilted affectation. But, with all its rigidness and precision, the
stage language still exercises some influence upon the sounds of the
colloquial language--considerably more than that exercised by any
particular dialect. But its form is to a large extent poetical; indeed,
it receives much of its language ready made from the poets.
As we stated above, in the case of our own language the only normal
standard that we are able to point to as the purest English is that
commonly spoken among educated people. In this case it is obvious that
the agreement between the different classes who aim at maintaining the
norm can be at best but an imperfect one. Each class of educated men
will have a tendency to fall into certain peculiarities of speech which
will mark them off in some degree from all others. The language of the
bar is not quite that of the army. The language of the Church differs
from that of both. The language of the educated in England, however,--in
other words, the language of those who aim at following the
norm,--agrees in one respect, that in all an emancipation from
dialect is aimed at, and, to a large extent, attained. This result is
largely owing to the fact that in England the better-educated classes
are in the habit of sending their sons to be educated out of their own
dialectical district, and the result is that they come into contact, at
an early period of their lives, with companions whose language is
characterised either by different dialectical peculiarities from their
own, or by an absence of any. But even so it must always be remembered
that those who speak their language in its greatest purity, i.e. with
the greatest absence of dialectical peculiarities, are subject to the
changes which mark all language and are an inseparable concomitant of
its existence.
But there is another means whereby a standard or common language may
become fixed, and may come to serve as the normal or ideal language of
the speakers of any given language. This means is the reduction of such
normal language to writing. The reduction of the standard language to
writing renders it independent of those who speak it, and enables it to
be transmitted unchanged to the following generations. It further
permits the standard language to spread without direct intercourse. Of
course, the influence of a written language upon dialects is much more
powerful upon the material than upon the phonetic side. A Scotch peasant
may read a page of the Times every day, and, if he reads it aloud to
his family, the absence of Scotticisms will act powerfully upon the
younger generation, and to a certain extent upon himself. But he will
probably continue to pronounce the standard language in much the same
way as his native dialect.
It is possible to make strict rules for the maintenance of a written
language, by adhering to the usage of definite grammars and
dictionaries, or of particular authors, and admitting no other
authorities. This happens when, for instance, modern Latinists aim at
reproducing the style of Cicero, like Mr. Keble in his celebrated
Prælectiones. But if so-called purity of style and expression be gained
by this process, surely far more is lost. The author writing under such
restrictions must necessarily lose much of his power of original
expression, and must find himself very much cramped in his vocabulary.
In fact, writing at a period when the whole character of the
civilisation has changed from that of his model’s epoch, he will find
himself at a loss for words to express his most common conceptions.
The fact is that a written language, in order to live and be effectual,
must change with the changing times, and admit into itself words and
methods of expression which have become usual among those for whom it is
to serve as the model. It may maintain a conservative influence by
refusing to admit such words and expressions too hastily; but it must
allow of no absolute barriers to their ingress. Modern Latin, in the
shape of the Romance languages, has survived, and has proved adequate to
the expression of modern thought; but in its ancient form, it has died
out as a living language; and the fair dream of the Humanists that the
tongue of Cicero might serve as the medium of communication to all
civilised Europe was destined to pass away unrealised, from the simple
fact that they insisted too strongly that this tongue should be
exclusively modelled upon that of Cicero himself.
A literary language which has emancipated itself from its models must,
of course, become less regular as time goes on, and each individual who
employs it introduces into it some of his own peculiarities of idiom.
But it need not split up into varieties geographically situated, as must
needs be the case under similar circumstances with spoken language. For
instance, the English written in America is much more like the English
written in England than is the dialect spoken in Cornwall like that
spoken in Yorkshire. Sound-change, of course, under our present
alphabetic system remains wholly undenoted. Inflections,
word-significations, and syntax are of course exposed to change, but to
a less extent than in the spoken language. Such a word as bug may have
retained its older significance of insect in America, and have been
specialised in England; but the word is written in the same way in the
two countries alike. Similarly, will and shall may be exchanged, or
one of these used to the exclusion of the other; but they will remain
spelt in the same way. Besides this, it must be remembered that the
so-called classical models in any language will always continue to exert
a large influence upon those who write in it; and this will always be an
influence antagonistic to change.
The method whereby a standard language may best secure the greatest
possible agreement over the largest possible area, and may join to this
agreement the necessary adaptation to the changed circumstances of
civilisation, is by keeping to the ancient models in syntax and
accidence, and by allowing, at the same time, a certain freedom in the
creation of new words, and in the application of new significations to
old ones.
Our great national languages are at once literary and colloquial, and
hence they possess a standard literary language and a standard
colloquial pronunciation and vocabulary. The problem is how to keep
those two languages in harmony. The colloquial language is, of the two,
as we have seen, liable to change in its phonetic conditions--a change
to which the written language is not so much exposed. It is therefore
obvious that the more a language changes phonetically, the less will it
be represented by the written language; and it is also plain that in a
language like English, whose spelling is so very far from phonetic, the
discrepancy between the written and spoken language may go so far that
the former may cease to exert much, if any, influence upon the latter.
To remedy this state of things, phonetic alphabets have been drawn up,
and various reforms in spelling have been recommended from time to time,
in order to bring the written into harmony with the spoken language.
The more that the natural language of each individual departs from the
standard language, the more will he naturally regard the standard
language as something foreign; the effect of this will often be that, as
the discrepancies between his natural dialect and the standard language
are more clearly felt, he will make a more conscious effort to seize and
get over those differences. Thus, in the border counties of Wales, or of
the Highlands, a more correct literary English is spoken than in many
English counties.
The different individual dialects of any country, i.e. the forms of
language used by each individual, are constantly changing their position
in respect to the norm, or standard written language. On the one hand,
the natural changes incident to all language are always tending to
alienate these from the norm; on the other, the conscious and artificial
efforts made to approximate the individual language to the norm are
constantly in play side by side with the other tendency. The main method
whereby this conscious approximation is effected is, in the first place,
the instruction given in civilised countries at school; and, in this
case, the standard language, or an approximation to it, is learnt at the
same time as the language of the district. But the dialect of each
individual’s home cannot fail to influence largely his acquisition of
the standard language. England, as before remarked, forms an exception
to most other countries in this respect, that many children are brought
up comparatively free from the dialect spoken in their geographical
area.
But, when all is said, there remains to be taken into account the
difference in each individual’s pronunciation, and his greater or less
capacity for assimilating the difference between the artificial dialect
and his own. These considerations will always operate as powerful
solvents of the integrity of a standard language.
It must further be noticed that the stock of words and their meanings,
as well as inflections and syntax of the artificial or standard
language, are constantly being recruited from the natural language.
Instances in point would be the different Scotch words, such as
ne’er-do-weel, adopted into standard English. Where the same word
occurs both in the natural and the artificial language, it sometimes
happens that both words are preserved in the latter; sometimes with a
differentiation of meaning and sometimes without; instances are birch,
church, shred, as distinct from the Northern birk, kirk,
screed. It will thus be seen that the colloquial language which serves
as the model of each individual is itself a compromise between the
strict normal language and the home dialect.
In the second place, the artificial language affects the natural
language by supplying it with words and inflections in which it is
deficient. Such terms would naturally be such as the artificial language
is more fitted to supply. No dialect throughout Britain is free from
such influence as that described.
In the third place, it should be observed that when persons speak an
artificial and a natural language side by side, the use of the former
spreads at the expense of the latter. The artificial language was
originally confined to writing, and was employed as a means of
communication with persons speaking a strange dialect. Once established
as an official channel of communication, it has a tendency to spread to
all literature, and gradually to private correspondence. And this is
easy to understand, seeing that the young generation generally learns to
read and write from written records, and that it is obviously easier to
accept a form of orthography made ready to our hand than to invent a
system of orthography which shall be applicable to other dialects
besides one’s own.
When the artificial language has once become the fashion, then, and not
till then, will the employment of dialect seem a mark of want of
culture. There are many countries still in which the most educated
persons are not ashamed to speak in their natural dialect. This is the
case, for instance, in Switzerland and in Greece at the present day,
and, to a less extent perhaps, in Scotland. It is therefore a mistake to
suppose that the natural language must necessarily be deemed inferior or
more vulgar than the artificial. It is, in fact, the necessity for the
employment of the artificial language which causes it to be universally
adopted.
We have now briefly to consider under what circumstances a common
language becomes established. It seems to be certain that no common
language would have arisen without some necessity for its appearance;
and that necessity arose from the fact of the different dialects into
which any linguistic area must naturally be split up becoming so far
alienated from each other as to be reciprocally unintelligible, and, of
course, the difficulty of comprehension would be greater in the case of
dialects, geographically more widely separated, than in the case of
those spoken by neighbouring people. Indeed, the wider the area over
which a common language spreads, and the more numerous the dialects
which it embraces, the more successful does it commonly turn out. Good
instances of this truth are afforded by the Greek κοινή, and in that of
the Latin language in its spread over the Romance-speaking areas.
We assume, then, in the first instance, the necessity felt for a common
language, before such is called into existence. It is further an
indispensable preliminary that a certain degree of intercourse, whether
literary, commercial, or otherwise, should exist between the areas,
however distant they may be, which are to partake of the common
language. It might seem natural to suppose that as soon as, and whenever
any certain given number of dialects had reached a certain degree of
difference from each other, there would naturally be evolved a common
language which would suffice for their needs. But, as a matter of fact,
we do not find this to be the case. The common language sometimes
develops between two or more areas possessing dialects less nearly
related to each other, more readily than between similar areas
linguistically nearer related, supposing that there are special
circumstances to favour the development. In some cases political
circumstances may effect this, as where a common dialect for Germany was
called into being on the basis of a common German nationality. As a
contrast to this, we may take the case of Polish and Czechish, which
are, linguistically speaking, more nearly related than High and Low
German, and which yet, as in the main belonging to different political
areas, have no necessity for a common language, and have therefore never
created one.
If a common language has once established itself in a large area, it is
rare for another common language to arise for a portion only of that
area. Thus a Provençal common language would be an impossibility in the
face of the powerful French which has spread over the greater part of
France. Again, a common language can hardly arise for any large area
whose single parts have already some common language which suffices for
their needs. This may be seen in the failure of the Panslavists to
create a common language in an area already occupied by Polish, Servian,
etc. No example of this fact can be drawn from England.
The introduction of printing is a powerful aid to the extension of a
common language. Thanks to the invention of printing, a written record
can quickly be communicated to a large linguistic area in the shape
given to it by the author, and an impulse is likewise given to studying
what is presented to readers in such an attractive and commodious guise.
But it is necessary that the alphabet employed should be identical for
all the people in the linguistic area in question; and, of course, the
language expressed by that alphabet must be widely understood over that
area.
It should further be noticed that a common language must, generally
speaking, be based upon an existing dialect, and that this dialect then
modifies itself to suit the demands of the different dialectic areas
which demand the common language. Thus, Luther expressly tells us that
he based his translation of the Bible upon the dialect of the Saxon
Chancellery: Modern French is based upon the dialect of the Ile de
France: Chaucer chose the London dialect as the most appropriate for his
purpose. Such cases as the modern attempts to form a common language in
the instance of Volapük, etc., have been but partially successful; there
was no strong existing basis upon which to found them.
It must be assumed as a necessity to the success of any common language,
that there are a number of persons compelled by circumstances to make
themselves acquainted with one or more foreign dialects. This may be
brought about by the demands of commerce, or from the fact that the
persons in question are compelled to live in the foreign linguistic
area, and to employ its tongue. We can see the operation of these causes
in such cases as the creation of such a lingua franca as Pigeon
English, which arises not merely from the fact that the English and
Chinese who use it as a vehicle of communication are ignorant of each
other’s language, but further from the fact that the Chinese who employ
it speak dialects so different as to be partially or wholly
unintelligible to each other. Similar remarks hold good of the Spanish
in South America,--which is learned by Italian immigrants speaking
different dialects, and serves as a lingua franca to them. But even
when such lingua franca, or common language, has been formed, it is
liable in its turn to further development. It may be influenced, for
example, by the more perfect acquisition of the standard language on the
part of those who use the dialect based upon it as a common language; as
is probably the case with the Pigeon English spoken by the Japanese: or,
by the adoption into the common language of an increasing number of
words from the vocabulary of those who are gradually allowing their own
dialects to be superseded by the common language.
Supposing, however, that a special dialect has been selected as the
model for a standard language, even in civilised countries, we must not
assume that it is possible to adopt it as the actual and pure model. The
model dialects cannot fail to be influenced by the dialect of the
special speaker or writer, and in many cases this mixture may make
itself very prominent. This is especially seen, perhaps, in the case of
literature which, like journals and periodicals, is intended mainly to
circulate in the special dialectic area. Thus, for instance,
Americanisms, Scotticisms, and Hibernicisms, are more common in the
newspaper press of America, Scotland, and Ireland than in the standard
literature published in those countries. Again, the dialect, on which
the model or normal language was based, will, from the very nature of
language, change more rapidly than the normal language itself, which
must from its nature be more conservative; so that here, again, a
discrepancy cannot fail to set in between the dialect and the model
language. The truth of this may be well seen in the changes which have
passed over the London dialect in comparatively recent times. The habit
of omitting the aspirate, or, as we say, dropping the h, seems to be
quite a recent development in English,[219] and to have spread probably
at the end of the last century. Dickens’ Londoners frequently drop their
aspirates: and he seems to be the first writer who makes his characters
do this on a large scale. On the other hand, the ven and vy of his
characters are hardly now heard in London.
And thus the artificial language, if it extend over a large area,
becomes differentiated into dialects more or less strongly marked, in
much the same way as the natural language within a particular district.
Probably English is the language in which this fact can be noticed more
easily and on a wider scale than in the case of any other language, from
the fact that the areas of English-speaking races are so widely
separated in many cases; and all isolation must tend to strengthen the
power of the dialect as against the artificial language. So-called
Americanisms, for instance, may be older forms of the English language
retained by the American dialect and lost by the English. On the other
hand, they may be new importations into the standard or model language
from the colloquial language, or from some dialect. These Americanisms,
again, spread to such English-speaking countries as Australia, Canada,
and New Zealand more readily and quickly than they do to England.
Consequently, the artificial language, in spite of its tendency to
conservatism, is manifestly changing in the different English-speaking
areas, although the change is not, of course, as great or as quick in
its fulfilment as that which comes to pass in the development of
dialects in the area of a definite territory.
It is, of course, possible to arrest to some extent the change in an
artificial language by the influence of academies, who shall
authoritatively decide upon the permissibility or otherwise of the use
of a certain word or phrase; but under normal circumstances the
involuntary development which we have spoken of is characteristic of a
standard language as well as of language in general.
A single linguistic area may, under the proper conditions, develop a
duality or even a plurality of standards, though instances of the entire
co-ordination of two different standards are, in the history of
language, very rare. The classical example for the duality of standard
is offered by the linguistic conditions in Greece during the period
between 250 and 50 B.C. Two types of normalised or standard language,
neither of them corresponding exactly to any one folk-dialect, and each
of them almost entirely uninfluenced by the other, asserted their
pre-eminence over the folk-dialects in two distinct districts. The one,
which we may call ‘Eastern Greek’ or the Attic κοινή, was based upon the
Attic dialect; the other, which we may call ‘Western Greek,’ was based
upon the Laconian. The former was the language of those political and
commercial interests that centred about the Ægean; the latter, of those
that centred about the Gulf of Corinth. The former represented the new
cosmopolitan spirit of Hellenism, the latter the conservative and
provincial spirit that had its political expression in the Achæan and
Ætolian leagues.
Here, as elsewhere, the levelling of the peculiarities of provincial
speech in the interest of a standard language represents and corresponds
to a levelling of provincial barriers in the interest of a unitary
civilisation, and under the impulse of great common movements of
commercial intercourse, political organisation, or religious thought,
and the appearance of two areas of levelling in language betrays the
existence of two areas of common commercial, political, literary, or
religious interest. The division of German Protestantism into the
Lutheran and Swiss wings, coupled with political distinctions, availed
to maintain for a long time, even in the printed form, a Swiss standard
of German, as distinguished from the so-called Modern High German.
To be distinguished from the cases of duality or plurality of standard
are those of complexity of standard. A portion of a linguistic area,
which recognises in general outlines, or in the most essential
characteristics, the common standard of the whole, may develop inside
these limits a secondary standard of its own, which, in its turn,
asserts itself as a unifying influence above the disparities of the
popular dialects. Such is the status of the American-English, if indeed
it be admitted that there be any American standard at all. The wide
disagreement upon this latter much-mooted question arises largely from a
failure to recognise what the true nature of a standard in language is.
In the light of the preceding discussion, and by the help of the
abundant available material, it cannot be difficult to reach some
consistent solution of this question.
The attitude of the extremists on the one side is well represented by
the dictum of Richard Grant White:[220] ‘In language whatever is
peculiarly American is bad.’ In other words, the absolute test of
correctness is the English standard, which is notably the usage of the
educated classes in the great centre of English life. It must, however,
be remarked, at the beginning of any discussion of this sort, that the
question concerns not what ought to be or might best be, but what is the
fact. If it be actually the fact that any considerable body of men,
whose usage, be it through respect for their culture, their
intelligence, or their position, or for any other reason, commands the
deference of the great mass of American speakers and writers, follows so
loyally the English standard as to regard as bad in language all that is
peculiarly American, then it is the fact that there is no such thing
as an American standard in language. There is, then, only one standard
English speech, and that the standard of London.
There exists, however, in America no educated or cultured class in the
English sense. The educated stand nearer the people than in England.
The children of the better classes are, furthermore, not so easily
isolated from the influence of the dialect of their locality as in
England. Certainly there exists in general no class with which the
popular mind associates the idea of authority in matters of speech, nor
whose speech is respected or admired as correct. The class of men most
likely to be imitated and most likely to exercise an unconscious
influence upon the usages of society is the intelligent mercantile
class, but this is not a permanent or well-defined body. Certainly it is
not a body likely to follow puristically a foreign standard of speech.
It is in part this absence of a homogeneous usage among the more
intelligent and influential classes, such as undoubtedly exists in
England, that occasions the apparently immoderate use of dictionaries in
America as standards of orthoëpy. So various is the usage in the
pronunciation even of many common words, like quinine, courteous,
envelope, tribune, route, suite, wound, that the ear in its
confusion of impressions fails to decide definitely, and recourse must
be had to the dictionaries. It is most frequently in cases of doubt like
these that appeal is made to the greater certainty of the English
standard. It plays the part of a convenient arbiter. This differs
entirely in principle from an attempt, for example, to introduce the
totally non-American pronunciation of trait with silent t final, or
of bureau with accent on the second syllable.
No single district or city in America ever has been or can be generally
recognised as furnishing a standard of speech. Washington is in no such
sense the capital of the United States as Paris is of France; New York
is not a metropolis in the sense that London is. Eastern Massachusetts,
with its chief city Boston, enjoys a certain preëminence in the
superior education and intelligence of its people; but its local idiom,
like the general spirit of its population, is too strongly provincial to
attract any imitation. In fact, nowhere in the United States have the
schools and all their adjuncts made more vigorous efforts to root out
the popular dialect, and nowhere does the English standard receive so
full recognition. The situation furnishes a tolerably exact parallel to
the rigidity of Hanoverian German, an imported standard on Low German
soil, and constitutes a further illustration of the well-known orthodoxy
of recent converts. The schools of Boston teach the ultra-English
pronunciation of been as bīn, while the native dialect has běn,
and the American κοινή, has extended to general use the secondary form
bĭn.[221]
The stage is not yet in a position to exercise any marked influence upon
the language, to say nothing of furnishing a standard. The influence of
the pulpit is probably greater.
But though neither the stage, an educated class, nor any given locality
has availed to vindicate for itself the right of establishing a
standard, it is an incontrovertible fact that, within certain limits and
to a certain extent, an American standard of English does exist. There
is a great number of words, of word usages, of pronunciations, of
phrases, and of syntactical constructions, which have, though not
recognised in English usage, a universal and well-accepted currency
among the best writers and speakers of America, and rise entirely above
all suspicion of provincialism. To avoid or rebuke them, or to attempt
the substitution of pure English words or expressions would be only an
ostentatious purism unsupported by the facts of society and the
necessities of language, and would expose the would-be corrector even to
ridicule and to the reproach of alienism. As has already been remarked,
we are not concerned in a case like this with the ideally desirable, but
solely with the existing fact. On no other basis can the existence of a
standard be determined. If, for example, any one should, in deference to
English usage, assume to correct an established and universally accepted
American expression like railroad car, which a well-known poet[222]
has thought worthy a place in serious verse, into its foreign equivalent
railway carriage, it would be generally regarded as an odious
affectation. The relatively few Americans who, without any sufficient
reason, but in a spirit of undisguised and helpless imitation, affect to
adopt English manners, usages, and dress, are as a class notably
unpopular with the mass of Americans, and, as unpopular, are
uninfluential. What is true of their other usages, would be in like
degree of their language.
To illustrate from the vocabulary alone, there is a large and constantly
increasing body of non-English words, which are used in all sections of
the country, which are shunned by no class of writers or speakers, but
which are universally used and esteemed as sound and normal expressions.
Such are lengthy, to donate, to loan, to gerrymander,
dutiable, gubernatorial, senatorial, bogus, shoddy,
mailable; these are slowly penetrating into the English of England,
and the path of such words is rendered plainer by their previous
adoption in the British Colonies, whose linguistic history is so akin to
that of America. Many words of this kind are of French, Spanish, Dutch,
or Indian origin, but have been so thoroughly assimilated into the
language by usage as to rank entirely with the purest English element;
thus levee, crevasse, prairie, canyon, ranch, stampede, to
stampede, corral, boss, stoop, squaw, wigwam, hickory,
racoon, moccasin, hammock, canoe, toboggan, hominy,
opossum, terrapin.
In determining the existence of a standard and what may belong to that
standard, we are in no wise concerned with the origin of words or
expressions. It is not a question of origin, but a question of usage and
of ‘good form.’ The observation that to guess, in its sense of
‘opinari,’ is found in Chaucer and Gower, contributes nothing to either
side of the discussion whether there is or is not an American standard.
The only question is whether guess, ‘opinari,’ is in universal and
accepted American use. The fact is, that, though in widely extended use,
it still remains dialectic, and is not a feature of the standard. The
word fall for autumn may in isolated instances be found in English
writers, and is undoubtedly with some meaning or other a good old
English word, but the fact is, that, as a substitute for autumn, it is
not ‘good form’ in England, and is in America. Spry, ‘active, nimble,’
is an ‘Americanism,’ because, though found in the English dialects, it
is a standard word only in America. The American use of sick, in
retaining the old English value now expressed by the modern English
ill, vindicates rather than controverts the existence of a separate
standard. Differences in the uses of words common to the two types are
illustrated by the following: lumber, in English, ‘cumbersome
material;’ in American, equivalent also to English timber: tiresome,
in English, ‘dull, annoying;’ in American, ‘fatiguing,’ as ‘a tiresome
day:’ to fix, in English (and sometimes also in American), ‘to
fasten;’ in American, ‘to repair,’ ‘to arrange:’ corn, in English,
‘grain;’ in American, ‘maize:’ transpire, in English, ‘to exhale,’
‘to become public;’ in American, ‘to occur:’ bright, in English, (of
persons) ‘cheerful;’ in American, ‘quick of intellect.’ Cases in which
the two standards use different words for the same idea or object are,
Amer. piazza, Eng. verandah; Amer. bureau, Eng. dressing-table;
Amer. elevator, Eng. lift; Amer. sleigh, Eng. sledge; Amer.
trunk, Eng. box; Amer. store, Eng. shop; Amer. public schools,
Eng. national schools; Amer. academies, Eng. public schools; Amer.
to graduate, Eng. to take a degree; Amer. student, Eng.
undergraduate; Amer. druggist, Eng. chemist. Amer. mush, Eng.
porridge; Amer. biscuit, Eng. roll; Amer. cracker, Eng.
biscuit; Amer. candy, or confectionery, Eng. sweets; Amer.
pitcher, Eng. jug; Amer. tidy, Eng. antimacassar; Amer.
postal, or postal-card, Eng. post-card; Amer. city, Eng. town;
Amer. fall, Eng. autumn; Amer. sick, Eng. ill; Amer. rare (of
meat), Eng. underdone; Amer. smart, Eng. clever. Many articles of
clothing, especially men’s clothing, have different names. Thus, Amer.
vest, Eng. waistcoat; Amer. sack-coat, Eng. jacket; Amer.
pants, Eng. trousers; Amer. drawers, Eng. pants; Amer.
underwear, Eng. underclothing; Amer. waist, Eng. body, bodice;
etc., etc.
Especially instructive it is to note how special activities,
particularly those of more modern development, have found themselves in
England and America separate vocabularies. Let us take for illustration
the language of railways and railway travel: compare Amer. locomotive,
Eng. engine (also American); Amer. engineer, Eng. driver; Amer.
fireman, Eng. stoker (limited in America to steamships); Amer.
conductor, Eng. guard; Amer. baggage-car, Eng. van; Amer.
railroad, Eng. railway; Amer. car, Eng. carriage; Amer. cars
(as ‘to get off the cars’), Eng. train (also American); Amer.
track, Eng. line; Amer. to switch, Eng. to shunt; Amer.
switch, Eng. point; Amer. to buy one’s ticket (not unknown in
England), Eng. to book; Amer. freight-train, Eng. goods-train;
Amer. depot (pronounced de̅e̅´po), Eng. station (gaining ground in
America); Amer. baggage, Eng. luggage; Amer. trunk, Eng. box;
Amer. to check, Eng. to register; Amer. horse-car, Eng. tram or
tram-car; Amer. horse-car track, Eng. tramway. The Americans
adhere to a nautical figure, and speak of ‘getting aboard the cars.’
American political life has developed also a vocabulary of its own. Some
of these words have gained a limited currency in England, but are mostly
felt still to be importations. Such political Americanisms are caucus,
stump, to stump, filibuster, federalist, senatorial,
gubernatorial, copperheads, knownothings, carpetbaggers,
mass-meeting, buncombe, to gerrymander, to lobby, mileage (as
a money-allowance for travelling), wire-puller, etc.
Many words have received derived or special meanings which have become
established in general and unquestioned usage: thus, locality, ‘a
place;’ notions, ‘small wares;’ clearing, ‘a cleared place in the
forest;’ squatter, ‘one who settles on another’s land;’ whereas in
Australia the latter word has developed into the special meaning of one
who rents a large area of government land on which to depasture sheep.
Vastly more important for our purpose than these mere differences of
vocabulary are those differences in phrases and turns of expression,
which, as subtler and less noticeable to the ordinary hearer and reader,
are less open to superficial imitation. Compare American quarter of
five with English quarter to five (also American, but less common
than the former); Amer. lives on West Street, Eng. lives in West
Street; Amer. sick abed, Eng. ill in bed; Amer. that’s entirely
too, Eng. that’s much too; Amer. back and forth, Eng. to and fro;
Amer. there’s nothing to him, Eng. there’s nothing in him; Amer.
named after, Eng. named for (also American); Amer. it don’t amount
to anything, Eng. come to; Amer. fill teeth, Eng. stop teeth;
Amer. walking; lying around, Eng. walking about; Amer. are you
through? Eng. have you finished? Amer. that’s too bad, Eng. what a
pity (also American); Amer. as soon as (also Eng.), Eng. directly
(‘directly he arrives’), Amer. right away, Eng. directly, straight
away; Amer. once in a while, Eng. now and then; Amer. quite a
while, Eng. some time; Amer. go to town, or go into the city,
Eng. go up; Amer. takes much pleasure in accepting, Eng. has much
pleasure; Amer. have a good time, Eng. to enjoy one’s self (also
American).
It is not totally without significance that American usage has
established and confirmed a standard of orthography that is in some few
points divergent from the English: thus honor, honour; wagon,
waggon; check, cheque; traveler, traveller; center,
centre; by-law, bye-law; jewelry, jewellery, etc.
Much that in English usage is approved and standard sounds to American
ears strange and outlandish. The English use of nasty, for example, is
to the American, with whom it implies the quintessence of dirtiness,
distinctly abhorrent and all but disgusting: even more may be said of
the semi-colloquialisms knocked up, ‘tired,’ and screwed,
‘intoxicated;’ while, e.g., haberdasher and purveyor are as good as
foreign words.
The possession of a common literature holds the two languages strongly
together, and assures a narrow limit to the possibilities of divergence.
It is only within this limit that the American standard exists. Freedom
of trade and intercourse, that has come with the building of railways
and especially since the close of the civil war, is rapidly replacing
the local idioms with a normal type of speech, and it is upon the common
usage in the chief centres and along the chief avenues of commercial
activity and national life that this normal type is based. It
corresponds to no one of the local dialects, but stands above them all;
it corresponds in the main with the English standard, but maintains a
limited independence within the scope of certain modern and special
activities of American life.